       PrimusGFS Audit
      Indoor Agriculture
    (Module 3) Guidelines

Used in conjunction with the PrimusGFS v3.2 Audit

                        PrimusGFS (owned by Azzule Systems, LLC)
                                       3030 Industrial Parkway
                                       Santa Maria, CA 93455
©2021 Primus Group, Inc. All rights reserved                       Rev. 1

                                                            Index    3
                                                                     3
Audit Execution                                                      4
Scoring System                                                       5
Automatic Failure                                                    8
Documentation Requirements                                           8
Module 3: Indoor Agriculture                                         9
General                                                              16
Site                                                                 23
Pest Control                                                         26
General Chemicals                                                    37
Production Facility                                                  38
Inspection                                                           40
Training                                                             53
Worker Hygiene                                                       67
Agronomic Inputs                                                     85
Irrigation/Water Use
Pesticide Usage

PGFS-R-063  Page 2 of 90                                           October 8, 2021
©2021 Primus Group, Inc. All rights reserved                Rev. 1

This document is for guidance purposes only and in no way replaces any regulatory legislation or
other legal guidance documentation or viewed as giving legal advice. PrimusGFS (the Scheme),
owned by Azzule Systems LLC, accepts no liability for the contents of this document, nor how an
individual chooses to apply this document. This document is owned by Azzule Systems, LLC and,
as such, must not be copied in whole or in part for any other use. Under no circumstances can
this document be copied by or to any person without Azzule Systems' expressed permission.

These guidelines help interpret/support the principles, requirements and expectations of the
PrimusGFS v3.2 Modules 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6 and 7 as noted in the Scheme normative documents. These
guidelines are neither exhaustive nor exclusive and detail minimum requirements only by means of
statements related to audit questions and expectations. There will be variations in applicability to an
operation based on the process(es) and commodities involved. Auditors and auditees should interpret the
questions and criteria in different situations, with the food safety and risk minimization being the key
concerns.

The operation's practices, policies and procedures should be pertinent to the situation at hand and be
able to stand up to any challenge by an auditor or other relevant interested party (including law
enforcement). Where laws, customer requirements and specifications, commodity specific guidelines
and/or best practice recommendations exist and are derived from a reputable source, these practices and
parameters should be followed if they present a higher level of compliance than those included in the
audit scheme.

Website links shown in this document are there to aid understanding and provide assistance by way of
example (link listings are not exhaustive). These links are not a sign of endorsement by Azzule.
Furthermore, Azzule Systems accepts no liability for the content of these links.

Please be aware that there is additional information on the PrimusGFS website including the audit
checklist templates. The PrimusGFS website also has access to the official PrimusGFS General
Regulations, which explain the overall scheme scoring systems and other details of the scheme.

The following text is a modified excerpt from the PrimusGFS General Regulations v3.2. It is provided here
as an introduction to the audit notes. For full and current text please refer to the most recent version of
the PrimusGFS General Regulations at http://www.primusgfs.com/documents.aspx.

Audit Execution

The audit should be performed using the most recent version of the PrimusGFS normative documents.
The PrimusGFS Standard is divided into seven Modules:

· Module 1 ­ Food Safety Management System
· Module 2 ­ Farm
· Module 3 ­ Indoor Agriculture
· Module 4 ­ Harvest Crew
· Module 5 ­ GMP
· Module 6 ­ HACCP
· Module 7 ­ Preventive Controls

Each Module is divided into sections, related to the specific Module and each section includes questions
that detail the requirements for the specific section.

Scoring System

For all Modules, the amount of deficiencies and the associated risks have to be considered to assign the
severity of the finding, which can be Minor Deficiency, Major Deficiency and Non-Compliance. When no

PGFS-R-063                                    Page 3 of 90  October 8, 2021
©2021 Primus Group, Inc. All rights reserved                                         Rev. 1

deficiencies are found, a Total Compliance is given. The possible points for the questions in each Module
are listed in the following table:

                              Scoring System for Questions

            Possible answer                   Possible Points for the Question

            Total compliance                  15 points 10 points 5 points 3 points

            Minor deficiency                  10 points 7 points 3 points 2 points
            Major deficiency                  5 points 3 points 1 point 1 point

            Non-compliance                    0 points 0 points 0 points 0 points

            Not applicable                    0 points 0 points 0 points 0 points

Detailed compliance requirements are noted for each question throughout this document, but some
general statements are described below. These statements are superseded by the specific question
compliance criteria and users should be aware that some questions do not follow the general statements
below (e.g., automatic failure questions).

        Answer                       Compliance for Questions
Total compliance
Minor deficiency                                                  Criteria Used
                  To meet the question and/or compliance criteria in full.
Major deficiency
                  To have minor deficiencies against the question and/or compliance criteria.
Non-compliance    To have single or isolated non-severe deficiencies (usually up to three) against the
Not applicable    question and/or compliance criteria.
                  To have covered most of the question compliance criteria, but not all.

                  To have major deficiencies against the question and/or compliance criteria.
                  To have numerous non-severe deficiencies (usually more than three) against the
                  question and/or compliance criteria.
                  To have single or isolated severe deficiencies against the question and/or compliance
                  criteria.
                  To have covered some of the question compliance criteria, but not most of it.

                  To have not met the question and/or compliance criteria requirements at all.
                  Having fundamental deficiencies against the question and/or compliance criteria
                  (severe or non-severe issues).

                  The requirement described in the question is not applicable for the operation being
                  audited. Justification should be provided in the auditor's comments. Be aware that
                  there are some questions that do not allow a non-applicable response.

Automatic Failure

There are some questions that if down scored will lead to an automatic failure and an overall score of 0%
for the corresponding Module. On being immediately informed of the automatic failure by the auditor during
the audit, the auditee has the option to have the auditor continue the audit or to have the audit halt at that
point (all charges will apply). The auditor should explain the advantages of finishing the audit, including the

PGFS-R-063                                    Page 4 of 90                           October 8, 2021
©2021 Primus Group, Inc. All rights reserved                Rev. 1

ability for the auditee to learn of other potential non-conformances and to show their buyers the status of
their food safety system despite the automatic failure issue.

Special Circumstances for Not Certifying

Please also note, that under special circumstances and upon finding serious food safety risks, a "not
certified" decision can be given. The auditee should be immediately informed of the automatic failure by
the auditor during the audit. The auditee has the option to have the auditor continue the audit or to have
the audit halt at that point (all charges will apply).
There are other Special Circumstance that are not technical in nature. Examples of these include
detection of deliberate illegal activities, such as deliberate mislabeling, discovery of falsified records,
attempting to bribe an auditor/CB personnel, threatening behavior towards an auditor/CB personnel, etc.
Please refer to the General Regulations for further details.

Audit Termination

Once an audit has been started, should the auditee wish to stop the audit for any reason, the auditor will
complete the report for as many questions as they were able to verify. PrimusGFS audits cannot be
converted into a pre-assessment audit once the audit has been started. If an audit is terminated early,
questions that the auditor was unable to verify will be marked as a non-compliance and will receive a
score of zero. For questions unable to be verified, the auditor will indicate that the audit was terminated at
the request of the auditee before the auditor could verify whether or not the audit conformed to the
compliance criteria of the question. A report will be created on the database and issued, and all charges
will apply.

Documentation Requirements

Organization's Food Safety Systems:

When an Organization and its associated Operations are being audited, the auditor is checking the
systems (SOP's, policies, etc.) and the implementation of these systems throughout the visual inspection.

While auditees often create and implement their own systems, they can also use systems that have been
created by other entities, for example, their customers' technical manager, their consultants, etc., or a
combination of resources. The Organization can create their own SOPs, or in other instances, can utilize
SOP templates provided by other entities. As long as the systems meet the requirements of the
PrimusGFS questions and expectations and these systems are being implemented properly, the auditee
should receive full points for their efforts. The auditee is responsible for ensuring that the systems they
use are reviewed, maintained and up-to-date. If the auditor detects any inconsistency, it will result in a
down score.

New PrimusGFS Auditees/First-Time PrimusGFS Auditees

· In operations that operate for more than three consecutive months throughout the year ­
     auditee should have at least three months of documentation (i.e. records of monitoring, training,
     meetings, etc.) available for review. If the auditee has less than three months of most of their
     documentation available for review, a pre-assessment audit is strongly advised. If the auditee has
     less than three months of most of their documentation available for review and decides to have a
     regular scheduled audit, they should be aware that they cannot receive full compliance for
     paperwork questions relating to monitoring and that the down score will be based on the
     amount of paperwork available.

· In short season operations that operate for less than three consecutive months throughout
     the year - auditee should have at least three months of documentation (i.e. records of monitoring,
     training, meetings, etc.) available for review (this may include last season's documentation). Where
     an operation does not have three months of records available (e.g., they are in operation for one
     month out of the year), the auditee should have at least the previous season's records available for

PGFS-R-063                                    Page 5 of 90  October 8, 2021
©2021 Primus Group, Inc. All rights reserved                 Rev. 1

review. If the auditee has less than three months of most of their documentation available for review
and decides to have a regular scheduled audit, they should be aware that they may not receive full
conformance for paperwork questions relating to monitoring and that the down score will be
based on the amount of paperwork available.

Existing PrimusGFS Auditees

· In operations that operate for more than three consecutive months throughout the year ­
     auditee should have documentation available from the date of the prior audit.

· In short season operations that operate for less than three consecutive months throughout
     the year ­ auditee should have at least three months of documentation and documentation at least
     since the last audit (which includes the last season). Where an operation does not have three months
     of records available (e.g. they are in operation for one month out of the year), the auditee should have
     at least the previous season's records available for review.

New PrimusGFS Auditee        Operates <three                 Operates >three months/year
Existing PrimusGFS Auditee   months/year                     Three months of records (may include
                             Three months of records         last season's records).
                             (may include last season's
                             records). Where an              Records since the last audit.
                             operation does not have
                             three months of records
                             available (e.g., they are in
                             operation for one month out
                             of the year), the auditee
                             should have at least the
                             previous season's records
                             available for review.
                             Records at least since the
                             last audit (or longer) to meet
                             the minimum requirement of
                             three consecutive months of
                             records.

Visual versus Verbal Confirmation

Visual confirmation is the default method of auditing, whether on the visual inspection portion or the
paperwork section. Scores and comments are assumed to have been visually confirmed, unless stated
otherwise. Verbal confirmation should be the exception to the rule and, if auditing properly, these should
be rarely used. If a verbal confirmation is accepted, the auditor should write this in the comments section
of the report for that specific question.

How to Use Point Assignment Guidelines

The following sections of this guidance manual are designed to help auditors choose the right score for
each question, thereby helping to ensure consistency. This document does not cover all situations and is
intended to be a guideline, as opposed to a rule. Auditors are expected to follow the guidelines as much
as possible, but it is understood that there will be situations where an auditor should use their discretion.
If an auditor does have to make a judgment call and/or tackle a situation not covered by this manual, then
the auditor should note the circumstances in the audit report with full justifications. (The auditor should
also forward these details to their Certification Body and Azzule Systems, LLC in a separate note, so that
this can be reviewed for future versions of the manual.)

In order to be consistent with the voluntary nature of requesting a third-party audit, and in order not to
seem to be a legal document, the requirements within the questions are written as "should" and can be

PGFS-R-063                                    Page 6 of 90   October 8, 2021
©2021 Primus Group, Inc. All rights reserved                Rev. 1

scored against. In other questions that use the term "ideally", these statements cannot be scored against,
but give the auditee an opportunity for improvement.

Notes in "red" are where the questions and/or compliance criteria have changed significantly since the
previous version. Many of the changes are to improve clarification, but some are changes to the actual
requirements. Please read carefully to see if these changes impact your particular situation.

PGFS-R-063                                    Page 7 of 90  October 8, 2021
©2021 Primus Group, Inc. All rights reserved                Rev. 1

Module 3: Indoor Agriculture

General

3.01.01: Is there a designated person responsible for the operation's food safety program?
Total compliance (10 points): There should be a designated on-site person/persons in charge of the
operation's food safety program, including food safety document control and verification of food safety
activities and ideally be independent of production. They should have documented formal training or
trained by someone that has the documented formal credentials. This training should meet all state and
federal requirements. Cross reference with 1.01.04.

Minor deficiency (7 points) if:
· Single/isolated instance(s) of errors and omissions in the records showing person/persons in charge

     of the operation's food safety program training and/or their relevant experience in food safety.
· There is a designated, appropriately trained person who is responsible for the operation's food safety

     program and is part of the management structure (e.g. corporate) however they are not normally on-
     site.

Major deficiency (3 points) if:
· Numerous instance(s) of errors and omissions in the records showing person/persons in charge of

     the operation's food safety program training and/or their relevant experience in food safety.
· An outside consultant is the designated, appropriately trained person responsible for the operation's

     food safety program however they are not normally on-site.

Non-compliance (0 points) if:
· Fundamental failure to document person/persons in charge of the operation's food safety program

     training and/or their relevant experience in food safety.
· No-one is in charge of the food safety programs, including food safety document control and

     verification of sanitation activities.

3.01.02: If the operation is growing under organic principles, is there written documentation of
current certification by an accredited organic certification organization? Information gathering
question.
Total Compliance (0 points): Organic principles are defined as: a system that relies on ecosystem
management rather than external agricultural inputs
(http://www.fao.org/docrep/003/ac116e/ac116e02.htm). Current certification by an accredited organic
certification agency following a governmental organic program should cover the audited crops, be on file,
and available for the auditor to review. Where an inspection has recently taken place, but new certificate
is not yet available, there should be documented proof of a recent inspection for the auditor to review. N/A
if not growing under organic principles.

3.01.03: Does the operation have a written food safety hygiene and health policy covering at least
worker and visitor hygiene and health, infants and toddlers, animal presence in growing and
storage areas, fecal matter, dropped product, blood and bodily fluids?
Total compliance (15 points): There should be a written food safety policy regarding worker and visitor
personal hygiene, GAPs, and health requirements. The policy should cover the rules related to hygiene
and health (e.g., hand washing, eating/drinking, smoking, specific clothing rules, foreign material issues,
cuts/wounds, illness rules, etc.), no infants and toddlers allowed in the growing area, what to do in the
case of evidence of animals and/or fecal matter in the growing and/or storage areas, and what to do in
the case of dropped product and if the product comes into contact with blood or other bodily fluids. All
workers and visitors should be issued the policy rules in the relevant languages and confirm by signing
that they understand and agree to abide.

Minor deficiency (10 points) if:

PGFS-R-063                                    Page 8 of 90  October 8, 2021
©2021 Primus Group, Inc. All rights reserved                Rev. 1

· Single/isolated instance(s) of errors and omissions in the records or food safety hygiene and health
     policy.

· The policy is not in the relevant language(s).
· Single/isolated instance(s) of workers and visitors not signing a document stating that they will comply

     with the operations' personal hygiene and health policies.

Major deficiency (5 points) if:
· Numerous instances of errors and omissions in the records or food safety hygiene and health policy.
· Numerous cases of workers and visitors not signing a document stating that they will comply with the

     operations' personal hygiene and healthy policy.

Non-compliance (0 points) if:
· No records available.
· Failure to maintain records.
· The company does not have a document for workers and visitors to sign stating that they will comply

     with the operations' personal hygiene and health policies.
· Fundamental failure of workers and visitors to sign a document stating that they will comply with the

     operations' personal hygiene and health policies.

Site

3.02.01: Is there a map that accurately shows all aspects of the operation, including water sources
and fixtures used to deliver water used in the operation?
Total compliance (5 points): There is a map or similar document (photograph, drawing) that accurately
shows the growing area(s), adjacent land use/features, location of permanent water fixtures and the flow
of the water system, including any holding tanks and water captured for re-use. Permanent fixtures
include wells, gates, reservoirs, returns and other above ground features. Septic systems, effluent
lagoons or ponds, surface water bodies are also identified. Document should enable location of the water
sources and the production blocks they serve.

Minor deficiency (3 points) if:
· Single/isolated source/fixture missing from the map.

Major deficiency (1 points)
· Numerous water sources/fixtures are missing from the map.

Non-compliance (0 points) if:
· There is no map or similar document (photograph, drawing).
· The map provided does not represent the growing operations observed during the audit.

3.02.02: Are growing areas adequately identified or coded to enable trace back and trace forward
in the event of a recall?
Total compliance (15 points): Coding details (e.g. location name or reference code, blocks of the growing
area(s), indoor growing area/building code or number(s)) should be in sufficient detail to enable trace
back and trace forward through the distribution system. There should be maps or other documentation
available demonstrating the coding details. Coding should link to the record keeping system (e.g.,
pesticide, fertilizer records, microbiological testing reports, etc.).

Minor deficiency (10 points) if:

· Single/isolated instance of errors and omissions in the coding details and linkage to the record

     keeping system.

Major deficiency (5 points)
· Numerous instances of errors and omissions in the coding details and linkage to the record keeping

     system.

PGFS-R-063                                    Page 9 of 90  October 8, 2021
©2021 Primus Group, Inc. All rights reserved                 Rev. 1

Non-compliance (0 points) if:
· There are no maps demonstrating the coding details.
· The coding details presented do not reflect the coding system used by the operation.

3.02.03: Has a documented risk assessment been conducted at least annually for the operation?
Total compliance (15 points): A documented risk assessment of the growing area, each water source and
surrounding areas should be performed prior to the first seasonal planting and at least annually, and
when any changes are made to the growing area, water sources and/or adjacent land. This should detail
known or reasonably foreseeable risks/hazards, the specific microbial, chemical and physical risks and
their severity and likelihood of occurring in the following areas: previous use of the growing area, adjacent
land use (e.g., CAFO), water source risks from animal access, upstream contamination/runoff, proper well
condition, water treatment, water capture, backflow, maintenance, cross contamination from leaching,
cross connections, recirculating water, sewage and septic systems, etc., (chemical hazards e.g. heavy
metals, perchlorate, etc., and microbial hazards e.g. pathogenic E. coli), water use, fertilizers, crop
protection chemicals, worker health and hygiene, equipment and tools used for harvest, storage,
transportation, topography of the land for runoff (% slope, soil type), prevailing weather conditions or
weather events and any other applicable areas. Farms and indoor agriculture operations following the CA
or AZ LGMA should reference current metrics e.g., a buffer zone of approximately 1,200 ft. (365m) for
CAFO's with >1,000 head or 1 mile (1609m) for 80,000 head CAFO, which may increase or decrease
after assessing the risks, determining, and deploying mitigation measures.
A detailed risk assessment should have been conducted and documented.
One approach:
i) Identify hazards.
ii) Determine who may be harmed and how
iii) Evaluate the risks and decide on actions to control the risks
iv) Document findings and implement actions
v) Review and update assessment as necessary

http://www.fsc.go.jp/sonota/foodsafety_riskanalysis.pdf
https://www.epa.gov/waterresilience
https://www.epa.gov/sustainable-water-infrastructure

Minor deficiency (10 points):
· Single/isolated instance(s) of errors or omissions on the risk analysis e.g. missing a physical,

     chemical or biological hazard.

Major deficiency (5 points):
· Numerous instance(s) of errors or omissions on the risk analysis e.g. missing a physical, chemical or

     biological hazard.
· Last documented risk assessment was done over 12 months ago.
· A single water source is not included in the risk assessment when multiple water sources are being

     used.

Non-compliance (0 points):
· Fundamental errors on the risk analysis.
· More than one water source is not included in the risk assessment when multiple water sources are

     being used.
· No documented risk analysis.

3.02.03a: If any risk is identified, have corrective actions and/or preventative measures been
documented and implemented?
Total compliance (15 points): For any risks identified in the assessment, the operation should detail what
practice is being done to minimize identified risk/hazard, how to measure/monitor the effectiveness of the
practice, how often to measure, and how it is verified and recorded. There should be documented

PGFS-R-063                                    Page 10 of 90  October 8, 2021
©2021 Primus Group, Inc. All rights reserved                 Rev. 1

evidence that corrective actions and/or preventative measures have been taken when any risk was
identified and were adequate for the specific situation. If overhead irrigation is used, there needs to be
examples of how the operation is minimizing the risk.

Minor deficiency (10 points):
· Single/isolated instance(s) of corrective action and/or preventative measure records missing details or

     not being adequate.

Major deficiency (5 points):
· Numerous instances of corrective action and/or preventative measure records missing details or not

     being adequate.

Non-compliance (0 points):
· No corrective actions and/or preventative measures were performed or are inadequate to control

     risk(s).
· Corrective actions and/or preventative measures were not recorded for identified risks.

3.02.04: Are the necessary food defense controls implemented in the operation?
Total compliance (5 points): The operation should have implemented the necessary controls for
preventing intentional contamination of the product and high-risk areas. These measures should be
based on the risk associated with the operation, as detailed in the food defense plan (1.08.02). Some
high-risk areas of the facility include: personnel, visitors, contractors, computers, raw material receipt (raw
materials, product and packaging), trucks (incoming and outbound), water sources, storage areas for
product, materials, chemicals, production areas, shipping areas, utensils or other items used in the
growing area, etc. The auditor down score if a lack of signage to prevent trespassing.

A down score for any unprotected (open) water sources (ponds, reservoirs, rivers, etc) should only be
given if the operation did not identify the water source in 1.08.02 and has not implemented the necessary
controls for preventing intentional contamination to the water source.

FSIS has created a self-assessment guideline for food processors titled "Food Security Guidelines for
Food Processors.

These guidelines are available at:
http://www.fsis.usda.gov/Oa/topics/SecurityGuide.pdf
Food Defense Guidance Documents & Regulatory Information
http://www.fda.gov/food/guidanceregulation/guidancedocumentsregulatoryinformation/fooddefense/

Minor deficiency (3 points) if:
· Single/isolated instance(s) is observed of an area lacking necessary food defense controls, based on

     the risks associated with the operation.
· Single/isolated instance(s) of damaged fencing observed.
· Single/isolated instance(s) of exposed external areas of the facility lacking fencing.
· Protection is not constant or continuous.

Major deficiency (1 point) if:
· Numerous instances are observed of areas lacking necessary food defense controls, based on the

     risks associated with the operation.
· Fence in place, but not a proper security fence (e.g., not high enough to prevent entry).
· Numerous instances of damaged fencing observed.
· Numerous instances of exposed external areas of the facility lacking fencing.

Non- compliance (0 points) if:

PGFS-R-063                                    Page 11 of 90  October 8, 2021
©2021 Primus Group, Inc. All rights reserved                 Rev. 1

· Fundamental failure to implement necessary food defense controls, based on the risks associated
     with the operation.

· There is no security fencing, or any form of protection based on the risk(s) associated with the
     operation.

3.02.05: Is the exterior area immediately outside the facility, including roads, yards and parking
areas, free of litter, weeds and standing water?
Total compliance (5 points): Litter, waste, refuse, uncut weeds or grass and standing water within the
immediate vicinity of the building may constitute an attractant or breeding place for rodents, insects or
other pests, as well as microorganisms that may cause contamination. Weeds and grass should be
maintained in order to help avoid pest harborage. There should be no excessive standing water and/or
foul smelling odors. If there is a designated smoking area outside, then there should be a disposal can for
cigarette butts ­ butts should not be found on the ground. Car parking areas should be free from litter,
butts, etc., especially if workers are using their cars at break times. When locating a suitable designated
smoking area, auditees should consider the need for hand washing prior to returning to the work place.

Minor deficiency (3 points) if:
· Single/isolated instance of an area not maintained properly.

Major deficiency (1 point) if:
· Numerous instances of areas not maintained properly.

Non-compliance (0 points) if:
· The exterior area immediately outside the growing area is not maintained.

3.02.06: Is any packaging stored outside, being stored protected?
Total compliance (10 points): Packaging should be stored off the ground (on pallets, racks, etc.) and
protected from dust, leaks and other contaminants. Neither food contact packaging (including RPCs if
used as primary packaging) nor non-food contact packaging e.g. cardboard outers should be stored
outside. If done, any outside stored packaging materials should be covered with a waterproof and dust
proof shroud (often made of plastic material) and included under a pest control program.

Minor deficiency (7 points) if:
· Single/isolated instance(s) of evidence of dust and/or leaks on packaging which does not pose an

     immediate threat of product contamination.
· Non-food contact packaging is stored outside, with shroud and storage area is included in the pest

     control program.

Major deficiency (3 points) if:
· Numerous instances of dust and/or leaks on packaging which do not pose an immediate threat of

     product contamination.
· Food contact packaging is stored outside (covered with shroud) and storage area is included in the

     pest control program.
· Non-food contact packaging is stored outside, is not shrouded, with or without pest control.

Non-compliance (0 points) if:
· Widespread evidence of dust and/or leaks on packaging which has the potential for product

     contamination.
· Food contact packaging items are stored outside, without shrouds, with or without pest control.
· Any observation of direct gross widespread contamination of product, ingredient or

     packaging materials (revert back to 3.05.10, automatic failure).

3.02.07: Are control measures being implemented for the outside storage of equipment, pallets,
tires etc. (i.e. out of the mud, stacked to prevent pest harborage, away from the building
perimeter)?

PGFS-R-063                                    Page 12 of 90  October 8, 2021
©2021 Primus Group, Inc. All rights reserved                 Rev. 1

Total compliance (5 points): Incorrectly stored pallets and equipment can provide areas for pest
harborage and/or cross contamination. Equipment should be stored at least 4" (10 cm) off the ground.
Workers should check the stored equipment (e.g., irrigation pipes) periodically to ensure that it has not
become a pest harborage area or dirty due to rains. Inventory checks should occur in order to ensure that
these storage areas do not become full of unnecessary items.

Minor deficiency (3 points) if:
· Single/isolated instance of equipment not stored properly.
· Excessive storage of old, obsolete equipment.

Major deficiency (1 point) if:
· Numerous instances of improper storage of equipment.

Non-compliance (0 points) if:
· No provisions are made to keep equipment from harboring pests.
· Evidence of pest infestation e.g. multiple occurrences of fecal contamination, nests and live pests.

3.02.08: Is the area around the dumpster/cull truck/trash area clean?
Total compliance (3 points): The dumpster/cull truck/trash area should be located away from facility
entrances, where traffic flow may be a source of cross contamination. The area around the dumpster/cull
truck/trash area should be maintained in a clean condition. There should not be any spillage on the
ground. There should not be any standing water or liquid seepage around the dumpster/cull truck/trash
area and there should not be any foul odor present. The dumpster/cull truck/trash area should be cleaned
on a regular basis.

Minor deficiency (2 points) if:
· Minor amount of debris around the dumpster(s)/cull truck/trash area.

Major deficiency (1 point) if:
· Major amount of debris around the dumpster(s)/cull truck/trash area.
· Strong odor around dumpster/cull truck/trash area.
· Visible liquid leakage from the dumpster(s)/cull truck/trash area.

Non-compliance (0 points) if:
· Evidence of old trash and spillage around the dumpster/cull truck/trash area, indicating that spills are

     not cleaned up as they happen.
· Evidence of insects or other pests in or around dumpster/cull truck/trash area.

3.02.09: Are outside garbage receptacles and dumpsters kept covered or closed?
Total compliance (5 points): All dumpsters and garbage receptacles should have a cover and be kept
covered to prevent the attraction of insects, rodents and other pests. Fine mesh lids are acceptable. Just
having the lids is not acceptable i.e. when not in use, the dumpsters and garbage receptacles should be
closed. Dumpsters that are only used for dry non-food waste (e.g., paper, cardboard, etc.) are exempt
from this requirement.

Minor deficiency (3 points) if:
· Dumpster(s)/garbage receptacle(s) have covers, but they are not being used.

Major deficiency (1 point) if:
· In the case of operations with multiple dumpsters/garbage receptacles, the majority have covers and

     are covered, but some are lacking covers.

Non-compliance (0 points) if:
· In the case of operations with multiple dumpsters/garbage receptacles, the minority have covers and

     are covered, but majority are lacking covers.

PGFS-R-063                                    Page 13 of 90  October 8, 2021
©2021 Primus Group, Inc. All rights reserved                 Rev. 1

· All garbage dumpsters/receptacles lacking covers.

3.02.10: Where soil, substrates or fertilizer (e.g., compost) are stored or handled, are measures in
place to ensure seepage and runoff is collected or diverted and does not reach growing areas,
product, or any of the water sources? A ZERO POINT DOWN SCORE IN THIS QUESTION
RESULTS IN AN AUTOMATIC FAILURE OF THE AUDIT.
Total compliance (15 points): Soil, substrates and fertilizer (e.g., compost, compost teas, fish emulsions,
fish meal, blood meal, bio-fertilizers, etc.) are stored in a manner to prevent contamination to the growing
areas, product, or water sources. Containers should be structurally sound and not a source of runoff or
contamination. There should be appropriate and effective barriers, coverings, soil berms, pits or lagoons
to divert or collect potential run-off or threats from wind, as applicable.

Minor deficiency (10 points) if:
· Single/isolated instance risk to the growing areas, product, or water sources.

Major deficiency (5 points) if:
· Numerous instances of risk to the growing areas, product, or water sources.

Automatic Failure (0 points) if:
· There are no barriers to collect run-off.
· Runoff was observed entering the growing area during the audit.
· Fundamental failure to prevent contamination

3.02.11: Where there are fill stations for fuel or pesticides, is it evident that the location and/or use
is not a risk of contamination to the product, water sources, growing areas, equipment, packaging
materials, etc.?
Total compliance (15 points): Fill station area should not be a risk of contamination to the product, water
sources, production areas, equipment, packaging materials, etc.

Minor deficiency (10 points) if:
· Single/isolated instance of the fill station(s) being a risk of contamination.

Major deficiency (5 points) if:
· Numerous instances of the fill station(s) being a risk of contamination.

Non-compliance (0 points) if:
· Widespread failure to prevent contamination.
· Direct contamination of the crop, ingredients (including water), food contact packaging or

     food contact surfaces. Auditor should consider reverting to Q. 3.05.10, the automatic
     adulteration failure question.

3.02.12: Is the audited area free from animal presence and/or animal activity (wild or domestic)? If
Total compliance, go to 3.02.13.
Total compliance (15 points): Animals can represent potential contamination to the growing area, to the
crop, to the equipment, etc., and therefore, should not be present in the operations. Evidence of animal
presence can include tracks, fecal matter, feathers, etc. Note: This includes any packaging or storage
areas (e.g., equipment, agronomic inputs, chemicals).

Minor deficiency (10 points) if:
· Single/isolated instance of evidence of animal presence and/or animal activity.

Major deficiency (5 points) if:
· Numerous instances of evidence of animal presence and/or animal activity.

Non-compliance (0 points) if:

PGFS-R-063                                    Page 14 of 90  October 8, 2021
©2021 Primus Group, Inc. All rights reserved                 Rev. 1

· Fundamental failure to prevent animal presence and/or animal activity in the audited area.

3.02.12a: Is the audited area free from any evidence of animal fecal matter? A ZERO POINT (NON-
COMPLIANCE) DOWNSCORE IN THIS QUESTION RESULTS IN AUTOMATIC FAILURE OF THIS
AUDIT.
Total compliance (15 points): Fecal matter is a potential contaminant to the product being grown. Produce
that has come into direct contact with fecal matter is not to be harvested. A "no harvest zone" of
approximately 5ft (1.5 m) radius should be implemented unless or until adequate mitigation measures
have been considered. If evidence of fecal matter is found, a food safety risk assessment should be
conducted by qualified worker and include appropriate corrective and preventative actions. Consideration
of the maturity stage and type of crop involved is required. Any evidence of human fecal matter in the
growing area is an automatic failure (scored in 3.02.13).

Minor deficiency (10 points) if:
· Single instance of fecal matter found in the audited area and a food safety risk assessment was

     implemented correctly.
· A "no harvest zone" is implemented but the radius is less than 5 ft.

Major deficiency (5 points) if:
· More than one instance of fecal matter found in the audited area and a food safety risk assessment

     was implemented correctly.
· Any instance of fecal matter is found in the audited area and a "no harvest zone" was not

     implemented.
· Any instance of fecal matter is found, and a food safety assessment is not conducted.

Automatic Failure (0 points) if:
· Any observation of widespread animal fecal contamination in the audited area is an automatic

     failure.
· Any observation of any human fecal matter in the audited area is an automatic failure. Score

     under 3.02.13.

3.02.13: Is the growing area free from any evidence of human fecal matter? ANY DOWN SCORE IN
THIS QUESTION RESULTS IN AN AUTOMATIC FAILURE OF THE AUDIT.
Total compliance (15 points): Human fecal matter is a potential contaminant to the product being grown.
Any evidence of human fecal matter in the growing area is an automatic failure.

Minor deficiency (10 points) if:
· There is no minor deficiency category for this question

Major deficiency (5 points) if:
· There is no major deficiency category for this question.

Automatic Failure (0 points) if:
· Any observation of any human fecal matter in the audited area is an automatic failure.

3.02.14: Is the audited area free of evidence of infants and toddlers?
Total compliance (10 points): Infants and toddlers can represent potential contamination to the growing
area, to the crop, to packaging and should not be present in the operations, including chemical or
equipment storage areas.

Minor deficiency (7 points) if:
· Single/isolated instance or evidence of infants or toddlers in the audited area.

Major deficiency (3 points) if:
· Numerous instances or evidence of infants or toddlers in the audited area.

PGFS-R-063                                    Page 15 of 90  October 8, 2021
©2021 Primus Group, Inc. All rights reserved                 Rev. 1

Non-compliance (0 points) if:
· Fundamental failure to keep infants or toddlers out of the audited area.

Pest Control

3.03.01: Is there a written policy prohibiting animals in the facility, including the growing areas
and any packaging or equipment storage areas?
Total compliance (10 points): Domestic and wild animals, including birds, are not permitted in the facility,
including packaging and storage areas. There should be a written policy in place to affirm this.

Minor deficiency (7 points) if:
· Single/isolated instance of missing action items in the policy.

Major deficiency (3 points) if:
· Numerous instances of missing action items in the policy.

Non-compliance (0 points) if:
· There is no policy prohibiting animals in the operation.

3.03.02: Is there an effective pest control program in place? ANY DOWN SCORE IN THIS
QUESTION RESULTS IN AN AUTOMATIC FAILURE OF THE AUDIT.
Total compliance (15 points): There should be an effective, proactive pest control program (in-house or
contracted) to control rodents (also insects, reptiles and birds where necessary) and prevent infestation.

Potentially useful website:
National Pest Management Standards, Pest Management Standards for Food Plants
http://npmapestworld.org/default/assets/File/2016%20Pest%20Management%20Standards%20for%20Fo
od%20Processing-Electronic.pdf

Automatic Failure (0 points) if:
· The operation does not have an effective pest control program.

3.03.03: Is the pest control program properly documented, detailing the scope of the program,
target pests and frequency of checks, including a copy of the contract with the extermination
company (if used), Pest Control Operator license(s)/training (if baits are used), and insurance
documents?
Total compliance (15 points): There should be a documented pest control program in place detailing the
scope of the program, target pests and frequency of checks. If performed in-house, the pest-control
operators or equivalent should be registered, licensed or have documented formal training (if regulation
does not require certification or registration). As applicable, the person's training and/or license should
specify structural pest control or equivalent or have documentation to show that the license includes
structural pest control training if not specified on license. Any substitute operator's license credentials
should also be on file. If the service is contracted, the pest control contract service/company should be
licensed in structural pest control, insured and the contract should be documented (quoting the scope of
the program, types of pests it covers and frequency of visits). When licensing legislation does not apply
(e.g., in certain countries), there should be evidence of on-going training. Auditors should check
documentation for expiry dates.

Minor deficiency (10 points) if:
· One piece of documentation is not in place or is not current.
· Single/isolated omission(s) in the written program.

Major deficiency (5 points) if:

PGFS-R-063                                    Page 16 of 90  October 8, 2021
©2021 Primus Group, Inc. All rights reserved                 Rev. 1

· Two pieces of documentation are not in place or are not current, such as evidence of the training
     and/or license for one pest control operator.

· Numerous omissions in the written program,

Non-compliance (0 points) if:
· More than two pieces of documentation are not in place or are not current.
· There is no documented pest control program.
· Written program does not resemble what is happening in practice at all.
· There is no evidence of the training and/or license of the pest control operator(s).

3.03.04: Is there a schematic drawing/plan of the indoor agriculture operation, showing numbered
locations of all pest monitoring devices (e.g., rodent traps, bait stations, insect light traps, etc.)
both inside and outside the facility?
Total compliance (10 points): A schematic drawing or trap map is on file, current and details internal and
external traps. All devices (e.g., tin cats, Ketch-Alls, bait stations, glue boards, insect light traps, electronic
fly killer units, etc.) should be numbered and clearly identified on the map. The numbers should match
what is in operation. The document should be accurate, dated and should show the type of device.

Minor deficiency (7 points) if:
· The location map does not distinguish between the different types of devices.
· Single/isolated instance(s) of trap(s) being missed off the plan.
· Single/isolated instance(s) of trap(s) numbering being incorrect.

Major deficiency (3 points) if:
· Numerous instances of traps being missed off the plan.
· Numerous instances of traps numbering being incorrect.

Non-compliance (0 points) if:
· No map available for review.
· Majority of traps are not included on the map.
· Map does not represent actual physical placement of traps at all.

3.03.05: Are service reports created for pest control checks detailing inspection records,
application records, and corrective actions of issues noted (in-house and/or contract)?
Total compliance (10 points): Service reports from the contract pest control company should be available
for review if pest control is contracted out. In-house inspection records should be available for review if
pest control is conducted in-house. Records should include services performed, date of service,
chemicals used (see below), signs of activity with corrective actions, and trend reports. Match Pest
Control Operator (PCO) signature on service logs with licenses/certificates on file. Records should show
when electric fly killing unit bulbs are changed. Where the contracted pest control has left their client
details of an issue or a recommendation (e.g., excessive gap at the bottom of a door), then the client
should acknowledge the issue(s) and note corrective action completion(s) where relevant.
Where chemicals are used, records should detail:

     · Product name of materials applied
     · The EPA or product registration number (as required by law)
     · Target pest
     · Rate of application (percent of concentration)
     · Location or site of application
     · Method of application (if applicable)
     · Amount of pesticide used
     · Date and time of application
     · Signature of applicator
     · Corrective actions
     · Trend reports

PGFS-R-063                                    Page 17 of 90  October 8, 2021
©2021 Primus Group, Inc. All rights reserved                 Rev. 1

National Pest Management Standards, Pest Management Standards for Food Plants
http://npmapestworld.org/default/assets/File/2016%20Pest%20Management%20Standards%20for%20Fo
od%20Processing-Electronic.pdf

Minor deficiency (7 points) if:
· Single/isolated instance(s) of missing or incomplete information/records e.g. pest activity, trap

     replacement etc.
· Single/isolated instance(s) where contracted pest operators action points have not been

     acknowledged and completed.
· Single/isolated instance(s) of not noting chemical use details.

Major deficiency (3 points) if:
· Numerous instances of missing or incomplete information/records e.g. pest activity, trap replacement,

     etc.
· Numerous instances where contracted pest operators action points have not been acknowledged and

     completed.
· Numerous instances of not noting chemical use details.

Non-compliance (0 points) if:
· No service reports.
· Fundamental failure to maintain service reports.

· Fundamental failure to record chemical use details.

3.03.06: Are closed doors and windows to the outside pest proof?
Total compliance (10 points): All doors, windows, louvers and screens to the outside should be designed
and properly fitted out to prevent the ingress of rodents and insects into the facility. Doors should have no
gaps greater than approximately 1/8 inch (3 mm). If doors, windows or louvers have screens, the
openings should be no greater than 1/8 inch (3 mm). Gaps are often at the bottom of doors and also at
the top of roller doors. Air curtains are acceptable, provided they are operating properly. Worker doors to
the outside should be loaded so that they close properly. As a guide, if you can see daylight gaps, then
further investigation is required. Special attention should be given to the maintenance of weather strips.
Air curtains and self-closing devices where used, should be operating properly.

Minor deficiency (7 points) if:
· Single/isolated instance(s) of there being a gap greater than1/8 inch (3 mm).
· Single/isolated instance(s) of personnel doors not closing properly and improper mesh size (where

     screens are used).
· Single/isolated instance(s) of an air curtain not operating properly.

Major deficiency (3 point) if:
· Numerous instances of there being gaps greater than 1/8 inch (3 mm).
· Numerous instances of personnel doors not closing properly and improper mesh size (where screens

     are used).
· Numerous instances of air curtains not operating properly.

Non-compliance (0 points) if:
· Widespread observations of there being gaps with greater than 1/8 inch (3mm).
· Widespread observations of personnel doors not closing properly and improper mesh size (where

     screens are used).
· Widespread observations of air curtains not working properly.

3.03.07: Is the area outside the facility free of evidence of pest activity?
Total compliance (10 points): All areas should be free of recurring/existing external pest activity.
Specifically, there should be:

PGFS-R-063                                    Page 18 of 90  October 8, 2021
©2021 Primus Group, Inc. All rights reserved                 Rev. 1

· No recurring/existing rodent or animal (e.g. dogs, birds, etc.) activity/spoors (significant burrows,
     trails, feces, tracks) in active areas within operation's property perimeter e.g. storage (packaging,
     bone yards), outbuildings (e.g. shade structures), etc.

· No bird nesting/activity observed around the exterior perimeter of the operation or external
     storage/outbuildings e.g. pallets, trailers/containers, bone yards, etc.

· No decomposed rodent(s) or other animals (frogs, lizards, etc.) in bait stations or along perimeter.

There should be no down scores attributed to finding a few (three or less) "fresh" rodents and/or evidence
of rodent feeding in the external traps.

Minor deficiency (7 points) if:
· Single/isolated instance(s) of recurring/existing rodent or animal (e.g. dogs, birds, etc.) activity/spoors

     (burrows, trails, feces, tracks, etc.)
· Single/isolated instance(s) of bird nesting observed around the exterior perimeter of the operation or

     external storage/outbuildings e.g. pallets, trailers/containers, bone yards, etc.

Major deficiency (3 point) if:
· Numerous instances of recurring/existing rodent or animal (e.g. dogs, birds, etc.) activity/spoors

     (burrows, trails, feces, tracks, etc.).
· Numerous instances of bird nesting observed around the exterior perimeter of the operation or

     external storage/outbuildings e.g. pallets, trailers/containers, bone yards, etc.
· Numerous (more than three) external traps inspected showing evidence of rodent activity.
· Single instance of a decomposed rodent or other animal (frog, lizard etc.) in external traps or along

     perimeter.

Non-compliance (0 points) if:
· Evidence of significant (infestation level) rodent activity (burrows, trails, feces, tracks, animal spoor)
· Significant bird activity in traffic zones.
· More than one decomposed rodent or other animals (frogs, lizards, etc.) in external traps or along

     perimeter.
· Any observation of contaminated product or packaging contact qualifies as an automatic

     failure under 3.05.10.

3.03.08: Are pest control devices located away from exposed raw materials (e.g., seeds,
transplants, soil, media), finished goods and packaging, and poisonous bait stations are not used
within the facility?
Total compliance (10 points): Pest control devices should be located away from exposed food products,
packaging materials or equipment to prevent any physical or microbial contamination. Poisonous
bait stations should not be located within the facility. Care should be taken to place pest control devices in
such a manner that they do not pose a threat of contaminating product, packaging or raw materials. This
includes the following restrictions:
· Poisonous bait stations and other pesticides should only be used outside the facility.
· There should be no domestic fly sprays used within the production and storage areas.
· Block bait or soft, pouch-style bait as opposed to grain and pellet bait should be used (except for the

     external use of National Organic Program approved materials).
· If used, insect light traps (ILTs), electrical fly killers (EFKs) or pheromone traps should be regularly

     cleaned out (kept free from a build-up of insects and debris). Sticky type ILTs should be monitored at
     least monthly and the sticky board replaced if ineffective. ILTs that use sticking as opposed to
     zapping methods (EFKs) are preferred.
· If used, insect light traps or electric fly killers should not be placed above or in close proximity (10
     feet, 3 meters) to product, food contact surfaces, equipment, or packaging material. Electric fly killers
     or insect light traps should not be located above dock doors (due to potential forklift damage) or in
     front of doorways (so attracting insects into the facility). Hallways or dock areas where product
     passes through are exempt from these distances, as long as product does not stop or is not stored in
     hallway or dock.

PGFS-R-063                                    Page 19 of 90  October 8, 2021
©2021 Primus Group, Inc. All rights reserved                 Rev. 1

· If used, insect light trap bulbs should be replaced at least every 12 months (this should be recorded),
     or as more frequently if directed by manufacturers.

· No fly swatters should be evident in production or storage areas.
· No bait should be found outside of bait stations.
· If used, snap traps should be placed inside a trap box and should not use allergen containing baits

     (e.g., peanut butter). Any snap traps inside stations should be checked at least weekly and checks
     recorded (scored in 3.03.09).
· Any indoor use of chemicals e.g. knock down sprays should be done without contaminating food,
     packaging, and equipment (see the next bullet point regarding poisonous rodent baits). All
     applications should be recorded properly (scored in 3.03.09), detailing where and when the
     application occurred, and any special methods used to avoid contamination. All applications should
     be made by experienced, licensed operators following any and all legal requirements and best
     practices.
· The use of poisonous bait within the facility should not occur. If this use is required, then the area that
     is being trapped should have all the product and packaging removed prior to the use of the poisonous
     baits.

Minor deficiency: (7 points) if:
· Single/isolated instance(s) of improperly positioning or maintaining electrical fly traps or insect light

     traps.
· Single/isolated instance(s) of a fly swatter found in production or storage area.
· Single/isolated instance(s) of grain or pellet baits being used in an outside bait station (external trap).
· Single can of fly spray (or other insecticide) found in the production/storage areas (including

     chemical/sanitation storage).
· Single/isolated instance (up to three snap traps) of snap traps being used outside a trap box (not

     presenting risk to product or packaging).
· Single/isolated instance(s) of any other issues noted on the compliance criteria.

Major deficiency (3 points) if:
· Numerous instances of improperly positioning or maintaining electrical fly traps or insect light traps.
· Numerous instances fly swatters found in production or storage area.
· Numerous instances of grain or pellet bait being used in an outside bait station (external trap).
· More than one can of fly spray (or other insecticide) found in the production/storage areas (including

     chemical/sanitation storage).
· Single instance of bait/poison inside the facility (inside of a trap).
· Single instance of bait/poison found outside of a trap, outside the facility.
· Numerous instances of snap traps being used outside a trap box.
· Snap traps using an allergenic bait.
· Numerous instance(s) of any other issues noted on the compliance criteria.

Non-compliance (0 points) if:
· More than one instance of bait/poison inside the facility (inside of a trap).
· Single instance of bait/poison inside the facility (outside of a trap).
· More than one instance of bait/poison found outside of a trap, outside the facility.
· More than one major deficiency.
· Widespread use of snap traps outside of trap boxes.
· Any observation of contamination of product or product contact material (this qualifies for an

     automatic failure and applies under 3.05.10).

3.03.09: Are pest control devices maintained in a clean and intact condition and marked as
monitored (or bar code scanned) on a regular basis?
Total compliance (5 points): All pest control devices should be maintained clean, in working condition and
replaced when damaged in order to accomplish their intended use. Date of inspections should be posted

PGFS-R-063                                    Page 20 of 90  October 8, 2021
©2021 Primus Group, Inc. All rights reserved                 Rev. 1

on the devices (unless barcode scanned), as well as kept on file. For digital monitoring systems, auditors
should review time-stamped digital monitoring records and periodic physical inspection records to ensure
program is working as intended.
The following criteria are met:
· If non-toxic glue boards are used, they should be located inside a trap box or PVC piping, etc., and

     changed frequently ensuring that the surface has a shiny glaze with no build-up of dust or debris.
· If cardboard traps are used (interior and dry areas only) they should be in good repair and marked as

     monitored (see below).
· If mechanical wind-up traps are used, they should be wound. Winding is checked by triggering the

     spring device to operate the trap. The trap should be rewound after testing.
· Approximately 10% of the traps, glue boards and bait stations should be checked by the auditor.
· Record of service verification such as stickers, cards or bar codes should be on the inside of the

     station and on bottom of glue boards requiring the station to be opened to record data (date and initial
     of inspector) or to scan. External labeling is allowed on traps with a clear window on top.
· Bait and other poisons should be controlled and applied by a licensed applicator. See 3.03.03
· Bait in bait stations should be secured inside the bait station on a rod above the floor of the station, or
     the bait station is designed so bait cannot be removed by a rodent or "float away" in a heavy rain. Bait
     stations should be tamper resistant. A key should be made available at the time of the audit.
· No bait stations should be missing entire bait.
· No old or moldy bait observed.
· Bait stations and traps should not be fouled with weeds, dirt, and other debris.
· External pest control devices should be checked at least monthly these checks to be recorded.
· Internal pest control devices should be checked at least weekly ­ these checks to be recorded.
· Any snap traps used should be inside stations and should be checked at least weekly ­ these checks
     to be recorded.

Local regulations may require exceptions/differences to above guidelines. At all times, local regulations
should be met but if the audit system requirements are more stringent, these should also be adhered to.
Some contractors use barcode systems that automatically check to see if all traps are monitored on a
scheduled visit.

Minor deficiency (3 points) if:
· Single/isolated instance(s) of traps, bait stations and glue boards not working properly or adequately

     maintained (check cards, cleanliness, etc.)
· Single/isolated instance(s) of unsecured bait inside bait stations.
· Single/isolated instance(s) of bait stations having moldy bait.
· Single/isolated instance(s) of any other issues noted on the compliance criteria.

Major deficiency (1 point) if:
· Numerous instances of traps, bait stations or glue boards not working properly or adequately

     maintained (check cards, cleanliness, etc.)
· Numerous instances of unsecured bait inside bait station.
· Numerous instances of bait stations having moldy bait.
· Numerous instance(s) of any other issues noted on the compliance criteria.

Non-compliance (0 points) if:
· Widespread failure to maintain the pest control devices.
· Widespread failure to monitor the pest control devices.

3.03.10: Are interior and exterior building perimeter pest control devices adequate in number and
location?
Total compliance (5 points): The distance between devices should be determined based on the activity
and the needs of the operation. As a guide (i.e. not expecting the use of tape measures) to number and
placement of traps and bait stations:

PGFS-R-063                                    Page 21 of 90  October 8, 2021
©2021 Primus Group, Inc. All rights reserved                 Rev. 1

· Multiple catch traps or glue boards in stations or PVC pipes should be positioned between 20 to 40
     feet (6 to 12 meters) intervals around the inside perimeter of all rooms. Spacing might be affected by
     the structure, storage and types activities occurring.

· Multiple-catch traps may be supplemented with snap traps in stations if necessary in certain areas
     (e.g., in areas with high dust levels (e.g., potatoes, onions)) or box mezzanines where large traps or
     glue boards are not practical.

· Inside the facility, traps should be placed within 6 feet (about 2 meters) of both sides of all outside
     exit/entry doors. This includes either side of the pedestrian doors. Effort should be made to avoid
     placing traps on curbing.

· Bait stations or multiple-catch traps should be positioned between 50-100 feet (15-30 meters)
     intervals around the exterior of the building perimeter and within 6 feet (about 2 meters) of both sides
     of all outside exit/entry doors, except where there is public access (public access is defined as access
     easily gained by the general public such as parking lots or sidewalks, school areas or areas of
     environmental concern). Device placement might be affected by the structure, external storage and
     type of area (urban, rural etc.).

· Bait stations (where used) should be positioned within 100 feet (30 m) of structures. This may
     impact fence line/property boundary baiting i.e. bait stations must be within 100 feet (30 m) of
     buildings and at 50-100 feet (15-30 m) intervals. If an exterior fence line/property perimeter program
     is utilized at distances greater than 100 feet (30 m) from buildings, then non-bait traps (e.g. multiple
     catch traps) should be positioned at 50-100 feet (15-30 m) intervals along perimeter. Auditor should
     check label for bait and ensure compliance to distance requirements on label.

· Outside packaging and any outside food storage should be protected by an adequate number of pest
     control devices.

https://www.epa.gov/rodenticides/restrictions-rodenticide-products#types
http://npmapestworld.org/default/assets/File/2016%20Pest%20Management%20Standards%20for%20Fo
od%20Processing-Electronic.pdf

Minor deficiency (3 points) if:
· Single/isolated instance(s) of devices positioned at longer intervals than mentioned above.
· Single/isolated instance(s) of devices missing or not within 6 feet (about 2 meters) of exit/entry doors.
· No bait stations along facility property fence line (auditor discretion on necessity for fence line

     trapping).
· Devices not located in a single area that should be covered e.g. break area, etc.

Major deficiency (1 point) if:
· Numerous instances of devices positioned at longer intervals than mentioned above.
· Numerous instances of devices missing or not within 6 feet (about 2 meters) of exit/entry doors.
· Devices not located in more than one area that should be trapped e.g. building perimeters (see text

     above).
· No exterior devices.

Non-compliance (0 points) if:

· Device positioning is such that the number of devices is nowhere near adequate in terms of spacing

     and coverage of entry points, e.g. one or two devices to cover a large production area.
· Devices not located in numerous areas that should be covered.

3.03.11: Are all pest control devices identified by a number or other code (e.g. barcode)?
Total compliance (5 points): The devices are numbered, and a coding system is in place to identify the
type of device on a map. Auditor should check that the trap map numbering and trap positions, match
reality. All internal rodent devices, should be located with a wall sign (that states the device number and
that it is a pest control device identifier), in case they are moved.
Minor deficiency (3 points) if:
· Single/isolated instance(s) of pest control devices having no visible numbers on them or on the

     station location.
· Single/isolated instance(s) of missing wall signs.

PGFS-R-063                                    Page 22 of 90  October 8, 2021
©2021 Primus Group, Inc. All rights reserved                 Rev. 1

· Wall signs are not unique i.e. not clear that they are trap identifiers e.g. just a number.

Major deficiency (1 point) if:
· The devices are marked on the map but the devices themselves are not numbered or the numbering

     sequence is incorrect.
· Numerous instances of pest control devices having no visible numbers on them or the station location
· Numerous instances of missing wall signs.

Non-compliance (0 points) if:
· None of the devices are numbered.

3.03.12: Are all pest control devices effective and bait stations secured?
Total compliance (5 points): All devices should be correctly orientated with openings parallel with and
closest to wall. Bait stations should be secured to minimize movement of the device and be tamper
resistant. Bait stations should be secured with a ground rod, chain, cable or wire, or glued to the
wall/ground, or secured with a patio stone to prevent the bait from being removed by shaking, washed
away, etc. Bait stations should be tamper resistant through the use of screws, latches, locks, or by other
effective means. Note ­ only devices containing bait are required to be secured. Live traps used indoors
are not required to be secured to the ground; auditee may use metal "sleeves" or similar solutions to
prevent displacement, crushing by forklifts, etc. Glue boards should be inside a device (e.g. trap box,
PVC pipe, etc.) rather than loose on the floor. Auditor discretion applies to traps placed on curbing.

Minor deficiency (3 points) if:
· Single/isolated instance(s) of bait stations not being secured.
· Single/isolated instance(s) of devices "out of position" or incorrectly orientated.

Major deficiency (1 point) if:
· Numerous instances of bait stations not being secured.
· Numerous instances of devices "out of position" or incorrectly orientated.

Non-compliance (0 points) if:
· Widespread failure to secure bait stations.
· Widespread failure to properly position interior traps.

General Chemicals

3.04.01: Are there chemical inventory logs for chemicals, including pesticides, fertilizers and
cleaning and sanitizing chemicals?
Total compliance (3 points): Chemical inventories should be on file. Chemicals within the scope of this
question include pesticides, fertilizers, cleaners and sanitizers i.e. sanitation chemicals and food contact
chemicals, such as chlorine, etc. Primary information in the product inventory includes: the product or
chemical names, container volumes, number on hand, and location of containers. Inventory by storage
area/type of chemical is optimal. The inventory should take into account the arrival of new stocks and any
discrepancies should be explained. Minimum frequency for inventory checks should be monthly during
production season and a copy should be maintained separate from the chemical storage location(s) and
available for auditor review. The frequency of the inventory checks may decrease in short season or off-
season operations; auditor discretion applies.

Minor deficiency (2 points) if:
· Single/isolated instance(s) of missing chemical usage logs and/or inventories.
· Single/isolated instance(s) of omission(s) or error(s) in the chemical usage logs and/or inventories.
· Single/isolated instance(s) of new deliveries not being accounted for.
· Single/isolated instance(s) of minimum inventory frequency not being maintained (if usage logs are

     not being utilized).

PGFS-R-063                                    Page 23 of 90  October 8, 2021
©2021 Primus Group, Inc. All rights reserved                 Rev. 1

Major deficiency (1 point) if:
· Numerous instances of missing chemical usage logs/inventories.
· Numerous instances of omissions or errors in the chemical usage logs and/or inventories.
· Numerous instances of new deliveries not being accounted for.
· Numerous instances of minimum inventory frequency not being maintained (if usage logs are not

     being utilized).

Non-compliance (0 points) if:
· No chemical usage logs/inventories are on file.
· Chemical inventory is not available for review.

3.04.02: Are all cleaning and maintenance chemicals (pesticides, sanitizers, detergents,
lubricants, etc.) stored securely, safely and are they labeled correctly?
Total compliance (15 points): Access to chemicals needs to be controlled, so that only workers who
understand the risks involved and have been trained properly are allowed to access these chemicals. The
chemical storage area should be located away from any growing areas, raw materials, packaging &
finished food products, water sources and living areas. Spill controls should be in place for opened in use
containers. All chemical containers should be off the floor, have legible labels of contents; this includes
chemicals that have been decanted from master containers into smaller containers. Liquid should not be
stored above powders. Where chemicals are stored, adequate liquid containment (spill controls)
techniques need to be employed (secondary containment, absorbent materials, angled sealed floors, spill
kits etc.). Chemical storage should be designed to help contain spills and leaking containers. Empty
containers should be stored and disposed of safely. All federal and state or local laws and regulations for
pesticides storage should be considered. Empty pesticide containers should be kept in a secured storage
area until they can be recycled or disposed of properly. If containers cannot be refilled, reconditioned,
recycled or returned to the manufacturer, they should be crushed, broken or punctured to make them
unusable. Containers should be disposed of in accordance with label directions and with federal and state
or local laws and regulations. Pesticide containers designed to be returned and refilled should not be
reused or tampered with. Food grade chemicals should not be commingled with non-food grade
chemicals.
Where pesticide storage is not located on-site auditor discretion applies on question applicability.

Minor deficiency (10 points) if:
· Single/isolated instance(s) of chemicals not properly stored.
· Single/isolated instance(s) of improperly labeled or unlabeled chemical containers.
· Single/isolated instance(s) of empty containers either not being stored properly or disposed of

     properly
· The chemical storage area is not marked to indicate its use.
· Single isolated instance(s) of chemicals being used without proper attention to chemical spillage.

Major deficiency (5 points) if:
· Numerous instances of improperly stored chemicals.
· Numerous instances of improperly labeled or unlabeled chemical containers.
· Chemical storage is segregated in an enclosed, designated area, but not locked.
· Chemical storage area(s) has inadequate liquid containment systems.
· Numerous instances of empty containers either not being properly stored or disposed of properly.
· Numerous chemicals being used without proper attention to chemical spillage.

Non-compliance (0 points) if:
· Failure to properly store chemicals.
· There is no designated area for chemicals.
· There is a designated area for chemicals but it is not an enclosed or locked area.
· Spilled chemicals found in the chemical storage areas (not cleaned up properly)

PGFS-R-063                                    Page 24 of 90  October 8, 2021
©2021 Primus Group, Inc. All rights reserved                 Rev. 1

3.04.03: Are "food grade" and "non-food grade" chemicals used appropriately, according to the
label and not commingled?
Total compliance (10 points): Food grade chemicals, including lubricants, greases, etc., are used in all
product/packaging contact areas. All chemicals applied should be approved by the prevailing authority
(e.g., US: EPA/FDA, Canada: CFIA/Environment Canada, Chile: SAG/Ministerio de Salud, Mexico:
COFEPRIS) for their designated use and used according to label instructions. Only food grade lubricants
should be used anywhere near product and packaging materials. Food grade chemicals should be stored
apart from non-food grade items to eliminate confusion between types, and adequately labeled. Non-food
grade chemicals also include cleaning chemicals and paint, for example use of domestic polishes which
are not intended for food contact surfaces and have strong fragrances should not be used on food contact
surfaces; office cleaning materials, restroom cleaning material should be stored separately from
production cleaning materials. Grease guns and containers should indicate which are for food grade
greases and which are for non-food grade use. Non-food grade material use, where required should not
be used in food contact areas and be limited to workers who know how to use the chemicals to avoid
contamination issues. Non-food grade materials should not be found in the growing/storage areas (unless
stored securely, with access to entrusted workers only). Chemicals should be used according to label
instructions e.g. following correct dilutions, H1 designation on lubricants, etc. Any chlorine bleach that is
used for making a sanitizing solution, must be of sufficient purity to be categorized as a "food grade"
substance. Some commercially available household chlorine bleaches contain fragrances, thickeners
and/or other additives not approved for food use. These products are not suitable for making sanitizing
solutions. If any chemicals are used to alter or buffer the pH of a sanitizing solution these should also be
"food grade."

NSF International: Nonfood Compounds
http://info.nsf.org/USDA/PSNCListings.asp
https://extension.tennessee.edu/publications/Documents/SP798-A.pdf
https://www.sclubricants.com/food-grade-lubrication/

Minor deficiency (7 points) if:
· Single/isolated instance(s) of commingling of non-food grade with food grade chemicals.
· Single/isolated instance(s) of grease guns not being coded for food grade/non-food grade materials.
· Single/isolated instance(s) of non-food grade materials found/used in the production/storage areas.
· Single/isolated instance(s) of a chemical being used contrary to label.

Major deficiency (3 point) if:
· Numerous instances of commingling of non-food grade with food grade chemicals.
· Numerous instances of grease guns not coded for food grade/non-food grade materials.
· Numerous instances of non-food grade materials found/used in the production/storage areas.
· Numerous instances of a chemical(s) being used contrary to label.

Non-compliance (0 points) if:
· No attempt to split non-food grade from food grade materials.
· Widespread use of non-food grade materials found/used in the production/storage areas.
· Widespread use of a chemical(s) used contrary to label.
· Evidence of the use of a non-food grade that has caused product contamination ­ revert to

     3.05.10, automatic failure.

3.04.04: Does the operation use the appropriate test strips, test kits or test probes for verifying the
concentrations of anti-microbial chemicals (e.g., dip stations, etc.) being used, are they in
operational condition and are they being used correctly?
Total compliance (15 points): The strength of anti-microbial chemicals (product and cleaning) should be
checked using an appropriate method for the anti-microbial in use (e.g., chemical reaction-based test, test
probe, or as recommended by disinfectant supplier). Water samples should be taken from, and/or probes
located in, areas farthest from the antimicrobial injection/addition site. Any water treatment at source (e.g.
well, canal) should be monitored. Solutions that are too weak will be ineffective, while those too strong

PGFS-R-063                                    Page 25 of 90  October 8, 2021
©2021 Primus Group, Inc. All rights reserved                 Rev. 1

may be harmful to workers or product. Where necessary, pH of solutions should also be checked.
Methods include, dip sticks, test strip papers, conductivity meters, titration, color comparison methods e.g.
tintometers, etc. All test solutions/strips should be within date code, appropriate for the concentrations
used and stored correctly (especially light and temperature sensitive materials). The auditor should have
the auditee check the strength of anti-microbial chemicals while touring the operation.
Potentially useful websites:
http://postharvest.ucdavis.edu/files/260798.pdf
http://ucfoodsafety.ucdavis.edu/files/26414.pdf
https://www.fda.gov/media/129790/download
https://ag.umass.edu/vegetable/fact-sheets/produce-wash-water-sanitizers-chlorine-paa

Minor deficiency (10 points) if:
· Single/isolated instance(s) of a method not being used correctly.
· Single/isolated instance(s) of a testing procedure being used that is not appropriate for the

     concentration and/or sanitizer in use.
· Single/isolated instance(s) of out of date verifying chemicals being used.

Major deficiency (5 points) if:
· Numerous instances of a method not being used correctly.
· Numerous instances of a testing procedure being used that is not appropriate for the concentration

     and/or chemical in use.
· Numerous instances of out of date verifying chemicals being used.
· ORP meter used to control pumps injecting anti-microbial and or/buffer without an independent probe

     or other method to verify readings.

Non-compliance (0 points) if:
· Chemical concentrations are not monitored.
· Equipment to monitor anti-microbial chemical concentrations is not available or is not being used

     correctly.

Production Facility

3.05.01: Is there a written cleaning schedule (Master Sanitation Schedule) that shows what and
where is to be cleaned and how often?
Total compliance (10 points): The company should have a master sanitation program that covers all the
growing areas, storage areas, break areas, restrooms, maintenance, and waste areas. The master
sanitation program should reflect the type of indoor growing operation. (i.e. mushroom production,
hydroponic, aeroponic, vertical growing). Within these locations, areas such as walls, floors, light covers,
overhead pipes, etc. should be included. List should also include equipment (food contact and non-food
contact), pallet jacks, forklifts, carts, floor scrubbers, trash cans, cooling equipment (evaporators, cooling
coils, drip pans, etc., in-house delivery trucks, etc.). In-house delivery and shuttle trucks should be
included in sanitation schedules, have SSOPs and cleaning records. The master sanitation schedule
should include a detailed list of areas and equipment to be cleaned as well as the frequency.
Infrequent schedules i.e. weekly and above, are usually created for several reasons e.g. cleaning areas
and equipment that are not cleaned daily, using a different cleaning technique/chemical than what is used
on a daily schedule and/or doing a more "in depth" clean on equipment. Note that all cleaning mentioned
on the schedule should be covered somewhere in the cleaning procedures and also on the sanitation
logs. Schedule should be kept on file in an easily retrievable manner.
Master sanitation schedule should include what is to be cleaned and when, i.e.:
· List of areas, equipment, internal transport vehicles, in-house delivery trucks, etc.
· Frequency of cleaning (daily, weekly, monthly, quarterly, annually, etc.)

Minor deficiency (7 points) if:
· Single/isolated instance(s) of errors or omissions in the schedules i.e. missed areas/equipment

     (including internal transport vehicles, in-house delivery trucks) and/or no frequencies being set.

PGFS-R-063                                    Page 26 of 90  October 8, 2021
©2021 Primus Group, Inc. All rights reserved                 Rev. 1

Major deficiency (3 points) if:
· Numerous instances of errors or omissions i.e. missed areas/equipment (including internal transport

     vehicles, in-house delivery trucks) and/or no frequencies being set.

Non-compliance (0 points) if:
· No schedules.
· Schedules exist but they are not reflecting what actually occurs.

3.05.02: Are there written cleaning and sanitation procedures (Sanitation Standard Operating
Procedures) for the indoor agricultural operation and all equipment?
Total compliance (10 points): There should be written cleaning and sanitation procedures for all
equipment (food contact, non-food contact, cooling equipment, etc.), areas (floors, walls, overheads,
etc.), internal transport vehicles and in-house owned trailers that should be cleaned and sanitized on a
regularly scheduled basis, based on written Sanitation Standard Operating Procedures (SSOPs). These
will depend on the type of indoor agriculture operation and should cover all applicable areas of concern
that have potential contamination risks to the product or water source. (i.e. mushroom production,
hydroponics, aeroponics, vertical growing.) There should be SSOPs covering the cleaning and sanitizing
operations noted in the master sanitation schedule. SSOPs should also be created for dry cleaning
operations (where applicable). This includes equipment (named equipment and equipment parts and
surfaces), floors, walls, light covers, pipes, ceilings, evaporators, cooling coils, drip pans, drains, drain
lines and reservoirs, internal transport equipment (e.g. forklifts, pallet jacks, trolleys, floor cleaners, etc.).
In-house delivery and shuttle trucks should be included in sanitation schedules, have SSOPs and
cleaning records. A surface cannot be properly sanitized unless it is effectively cleaned. Use of a sanitizer
is required unless there are justified exceptions that are fully documented. Procedures should respect the
label (e.g. rinse/no-rinse, sanitizers, dwell time, etc.) and match operations noted on the master sanitation
schedule (3.05.01). These procedures should include:
· Responsibility for cleaning with cleaning methods
· Item/area to be cleaned
· Frequency of cleaning
· Safety precautions (tag outs, personnel safety with respect to chemicals, etc.)
· Chemical (name, dilution and water temperature requirements (as applicable)) and utensils used).
· Specific preparation procedures regarding dilution (unless purchased as ready-to-use) for the specific

     chemicals or sanitizers being used and verification testing instructions and records (where
     appropriate
· Detailed cleaning and sanitation methods, including solution temperature (as applicable), water
     pressure (as applicable), dwell times, any disassembly/reassembly instructions and cleaning
     verification procedures
· Following the standard order:
1. Dry clean
2. Rinse
3. Clean
4. Rinse
5. Sanitize if required
6. Rinse (if label requires)
· Special instructions with respect to cleaning
· Responsible person in charge of cleaning (sanitation supervisor)
· Logs/records of cleaning and responsibility for verification
· Verification procedures (visual, ATP, microbial) and acceptance criteria

21 CFR Part 112 Subpart L
https://www.accessdata.fda.gov/scripts/cdrh/cfdocs/cfCFR/CFRSearch.cfm?CFRPart=112&showFR=1&s
ubpartNode=21:2.0.1.1.12.11
Control of Listeria monocytogenes in Ready-to-eat Foods: Guidance for Industry
https://www.fda.gov/media/102633/download

PGFS-R-063                                    Page 27 of 90  October 8, 2021
©2021 Primus Group, Inc. All rights reserved                 Rev. 1

Minor deficiency (7 points) if:
· Single/isolated instance(s) of errors and omissions within the SSOPs.
· Single/isolated instance(s) of omitted procedure(s) for a piece of equipment, internal transport vehicle

     or facility area.

Major deficiency (3 points) if:
· Numerous instances of errors and omissions within the SSOPs.
· Numerous instances of omitted procedures for a piece of equipment, internal transport vehicle or

     facility area.

Non-compliance (0 points) if:
· No written procedures have been developed.
· Procedures exist but they are not reflecting what actually occurs.

3.05.03: Are cleaning and sanitation logs on file that show what was done, when and by who?
Total compliance (10 points): The company has sanitation logs that cover all areas (e.g., production
areas, storage areas, break areas, restrooms, maintenance, etc.), detailing walls, floors,
overhead and all equipment (e.g., production equipment (food contact and non-food contact), pallet jacks,
forklifts, carts, floor scrubbers, cooling equipment, lift trucks, company owned trailers, etc.). Logs are kept
on file in an easily retrievable manner. The logs should be cross-checked against the master sanitation
program (3.05.01). Logs of infrequent cleaning should be checked. Logs should be applicable to the type
of indoor growing production and include:
· Date
· List of areas/equipment that were cleaned and sanitized
· The individual accountable who signed-off for each task completed
· Verification of task completed
· Any deviations against the set SSOPs

Minor deficiency (7 points) if:
· Single/isolated instance(s) of incomplete records, discrepancies against the master sanitation

     schedule or other omissions.

Major deficiency (3 points) if:
· Numerous instances of incomplete records, discrepancies against the master sanitation schedule or

     other omissions.
· Missing infrequent cleaning logs.

Non-compliance (0 points) if:
· No sanitation logs.
· Sanitation logs exist but they are not reflecting what actually occurs.

3.05.04: Where used, are there records showing filters in air conditioning, evaporative coolers,
ventilation and air filtration units are regularly cleaned and replaced?
Total compliance (5 points). Records should be made available to verify that filters in air conditioning,
evaporative coolers, ventilation and air filtration units serving production (product handling) areas are
regularly cleaned and replaced. Records might include in-house sanitation records, maintenance records
and/or contractor records/invoices. Non-applicable if air conditioning, evaporative coolers, ventilation and
air filtration units are not used in the operation.

Minor compliance (3 points) if:
· Single/isolated instance(s) of incomplete records or omissions.

Major compliance (1 point) if:
· Numerous instances of incomplete records or omissions.

PGFS-R-063                                    Page 28 of 90  October 8, 2021
©2021 Primus Group, Inc. All rights reserved                 Rev. 1

Non-compliance (0 points) if:
· No records.
· Fundamental failure to maintain records.

3.05.05: Where used, are there records showing cooling units are maintenance serviced and
cleaned at least every 12 months or more frequently as required?
Total compliance (10 points): Records should be available to verify that the cooling units are serviced and
cleaned on a scheduled basis. Records might include in-house sanitation records, maintenance records
and/or contractor records/invoices. Note contracts, invoices etc., must clearly state the services provided
as per any other record. A cleaning and servicing at least once in the last 12 months is a minimum
requirement, but usually frequency is higher, especially in high humidity and also with chiller units that are
known to become dirty at a faster rate than others, e.g. next to open doors. Non-applicable if cooling units
are not used in the operation.

Minor Deficiency (7 points) if:

· Single/isolated instance(s) of omissions or incorrect data in the records.

Major Deficiency (3 points)

· Numerous instances of omissions or incorrect data in the records.

Non-compliance (0 points)
· No records.
· Failure to maintain records.

3.05.06: If fans or other blowing equipment are used, are they operated in a manner that minimizes
the potential for contaminating product, equipment, or packaging materials?
Total compliance (5 points): All fan guards (cooling units and general ventilation) in the facility are clean.
There is no build-up of dust or other materials on the fan guards. Other blowing equipment (e.g. swamp
cooler) are kept clean and properly maintained. Non-applicable if fans or blowing equipment are not used
in the operation.

Minor deficiency (3 points) if
· Single/isolated instance(s) of unclean fans/blowing equipment and/or evidence of potential

     contamination to product or packaging.

Major deficiency (1 point) if:
· Numerous instances of unclean fans/blowing equipment and/or evidence of potential contamination to

     product or packaging.

Non-compliance (0 points) if:
· Fundamental failure to maintain clean fan guards and evidence of potential contamination to product

     or packaging.
· There is a single gross incidence of evidence of unacceptable limits of spoilage or

     adulteration in raw materials, finished goods, or packaging. In this case the score reverts back
     to 3.05.10.

3.05.07: Is there a documented glass and brittle plastic management procedure (including
company glass and brittle plastic policy, glass breakage procedure and where necessary a glass
register)?
Total compliance (10 points). There should be a written glass and brittle plastic policy and procedure,
which should state:
· Where glass and brittle plastic are prohibited and where glass and brittle plastic are allowed.
· Policy should state how workers should report missing or broken spectacles or contact lenses and to

     whom they report the issue.

PGFS-R-063                                    Page 29 of 90  October 8, 2021
©2021 Primus Group, Inc. All rights reserved                 Rev. 1

· If certain glass and brittle plastic items are allowed, then a glass register should exist describing each
     item, location and quantity. The glass register should only list items that could not be replaced with a
     less dangerous material. The glass register should not be abused by allowing glass items on site that
     are usually viewed as poor GMP e.g. allowing glass drinking bottles into production areas,
     unprotected glass light bulbs. Glass register items should be checked on a routine basis (at least
     monthly) to ensure they are not damaged/cracked etc. Checks should be documented.

· Glass breakage procedure including requiring recording what happened, recording what happens to
     potentially affected product, recording future preventative actions and especially where to record the
     incident details e.g. in the NUOCA log.

· Clean-up procedure after glass or brittle plastic breakage should indicate what equipment to use and
     include boot and tool checks/decontamination procedures to ensure broken glass or brittle plastic is
     not unintentionally transported out of the area.

· A no glass policy in production, storage or maintenance areas should be the target.

Minor deficiency (7 points) if:
· Policy lacks an element listed above.
· Single/isolated instance(s) where glass or brittle plastic breakage details have not been recorded

     properly.
· Single/isolated instance(s) of glass register items not being checked on a routine basis.

Major deficiency (3 points) if:
· Policy lacks more than one element noted above.
· Numerous instances where glass or brittle plastic breakage details are not being recorded properly
· Numerous instances of glass register items not being checked on a routine basis.

Non-compliance (0 points) if:
· No policy exists
· There has been a glass or brittle plastic breakage, but no records exist.
· Fundamental failures to check glass register items on a routine basis.

3.05.08: Are any potential foreign material issues (e.g., metal, glass, plastic) controlled?
Total compliance (10 points): No metal, glass or plastic issues noted (excluding issues noted under
specific questions already noted within this audit). This question is designed to allow the auditor to
underline potential foreign material contaminants to the auditee that are not covered by other more
specific questions within the audit. Examples include: pins in sign boards within the facility, using
"snappable" blades instead of one-piece blades, noting broken and brittle plastic issues on re-useable
totes and finding uncontrolled glass items like coffee pots, computer screens, clock faces, eye glasses,
office window glass, brittle plastic from any source, staples, etc. in production areas. Plastic coated
shatterproof light bulbs are also acceptable without further protection. Auditors should take precaution not
to bring glass items into the facility during inspections. If a glass or brittle plastic item cannot be replaced
immediately or glass is necessary, e.g. a high-pressure gauge, then use of a glass register might be
considered, see question in 3.05.07.

Minor deficiency (7 points) if:
· Single/isolated instance(s) of potential foreign material contaminants observed.
· Single/isolated instance(s) of glass or brittle plastic item noted in the production/storage areas, but is

     not accounted for on the glass register.

Major deficiency (3 points) if:
· Numerous instances of potential foreign material contaminants observed.
· Numerous glass or brittle plastic items noted in the production/storage areas, but are not accounted

     for on the glass register.
· Single instance of a broken glass item found within the facility.

Non-compliance (0 points) if:

PGFS-R-063                                    Page 30 of 90  October 8, 2021
©2021 Primus Group, Inc. All rights reserved                 Rev. 1

· Widespread failure to control potential foreign objects on site.
· More than one instance of a broken glass or brittle plastic item found within the facility.
· Any incident of direct product contamination with a foreign material like glass, metal or plastic

     constitutes a health hazard and is viewed as adulteration. Revert to Q 3.05.10.

3.05.09: Are all lights in the facility that could potentially contaminate raw materials (e.g. seeds,
transplants, soil, media), product, equipment or packaging shielded, coated or otherwise shatter
resistant to protect product from contamination in the event of a breakage?
Total compliance (15 points): All glass lights in the facility that can potentially contaminate finished
products, raw materials, equipment, or packaging should be shielded, coated or manufactured of shatter-
resistant materials to protect from product contamination in the event of a breakage. This includes, but is
not limited to items such as light bulbs, emergency lights, truck loading lights (dock lamps), insect light
trap lights, forklift lights, lights in bathrooms or maintenance shops that open into the production area, etc.
End piece fittings on tube lights should be secure. Precautions should be taken to prevent glass
contamination in the event of glass breakage. Windows and computer monitors in production areas
should be covered with a plastic film to prevent shatter.

Minor deficiency (10 points) if:
· Single/isolated instance(s) of unprotected glass in an area that could potentially contaminate finished

     product, raw materials, processing/packaging equipment, or packaging materials.
· Observed missing end piece tube light fittings.

Major deficiency (5 points) if:
· Numerous instances of unprotected glass in an area that could potentially contaminate finished

     product, raw materials, processing/packaging equipment, or packaging materials.
· Single instance of a broken light found within the facility.

Non-compliance (0 points) if:

· Majority of lights are not protected.
· More than one instance of broken lights found within the facility.

3.05.10: Are raw materials (e.g. seeds, transplants, soil, media), finished goods and food contact
packaging within accepted tolerances for spoilage and free from adulteration? ANY DOWN
SCORE IN THIS QUESTION RESULTS IN AN AUTOMATIC FAILURE OF THE AUDIT.
Total compliance (15 points): Raw materials (e.g. seeds, transplants, soil, media), finished goods, food
contact packaging and food contact surfaces should be free from spoilage, adulteration and/or gross
contamination (21 CFR 110.3g). If legislation exists, then the contamination should be viewed against this
legislation (e.g., USDA Grading Standards often include decay tolerances). Spoilage and adulteration
would include any physical, chemical or biological contamination including blood and bodily fluids.
Measures should be taken to prevent any known or reasonably foreseeable hazard (e.g., Clostridium
botulinum in mushrooms). This question is designed to allow an auditor to halt an audit when finding
gross contamination issues. Examples might include glass, trash/litter, motor oil in products, etc. Is the
issue widespread or a one-off issue? Where an issue is observed by an operator in the normal process,
auditor should observe the actions of the operator before scoring. Auditors should use their discretion and
decide whether the frequency of the contamination warrants an automatic failure.

Food Defect Levels Handbook
https://www.fda.gov/food/ingredients-additives-gras-packaging-guidance-documents-regulatory-
information/food-defect-levels-handbook
CPG Sec. 555.425 Foods, Adulteration Involving hard or Sharp Foreign Objects,
https://www.fda.gov/regulatory-information/search-fda-guidance-documents/cpg-sec-555425-foods-
adulteration-involving-hard-or-sharp-foreign-objects
US FDA/CFSAN Defect Levels Handbook, The Food Defect Action Levels
http://www.fda.gov/food/guidanceregulation/guidancedocumentsregulatoryinformation/sanitationtransport
ation/ucm056174.htm

PGFS-R-063                                    Page 31 of 90  October 8, 2021
©2021 Primus Group, Inc. All rights reserved                 Rev. 1

US EPA Water Quality Standards for Coastal and Great Lakes Recreation Waters
https://www.epa.gov/beach-tech/final-water-quality-standards-bacteria-rule-coastal-and-great-lakes-
recreation-waters

Minor deficiency (10 points) if:
     · There is no minor deficiency category for this question

Major deficiency (5 points) if:
· There is no major deficiency category for this question.

Automatic Failure (0 points) if:
· Numerous incidences of spoilage or adulteration of product.
· There is a single gross incidence of evidence of unacceptable limits of spoilage or

     adulteration in raw materials, finished goods, or packaging.

3.05.11: Are materials (commodities, packaging, inputs, etc.) properly marked with codes (receipt
dates, manufacture dates, etc.)?
Total compliance (5 points): All materials should be properly marked with receipt dates and/or tracking
information (lot numbers, code dating) for traceability/recall and stock rotation purposes. Finished product
coding should consider any specific customer requirements (e.g., as per customer specifications,
customer expectation requirements). This coding should be understood by all workers, in order to ensure
FIFO and effective traceback/recall procedures. Coding on raw and finished product should also consider
any local or national laws where they exist.

Minor deficiency (3 points) if:
· Single/isolated instance(s) of missing receipt dates and/or tracking information on commodities,

     packaging, inputs, etc.

Major deficiency (1 point) if:
· Numerous instances of missing receipt dates and/or tracking information on commodities, packaging,

     inputs, etc.

Non-compliance (0 points) if:
· There are no receipt dates and/or tracking information on commodities, packaging, inputs,, etc.

3.05.12: Are materials (commodities, packaging, etc.) rotated using FIFO policy?
Total compliance (5 points): All materials should be rotated using FIFO (First In First Out) policy to ensure
items are used in the correct order they are received and within their allocated shelf-life. Materials should
be clearly marked or labeled with some kind of rotation coding that is understood by all workers, in order
to ensure FIFO and effective traceback/recall procedures. Packaging rotation might be affected by market
forces. Having a "Just In Time" ordering policy and thereby having very limited stock volumes, is
acceptable as a replacement for FIFO if it can be proven e.g. the auditor can see that hardly any stock is
maintained. "Just In Time" ordering policy does not replace the need to tag materials as per question
3.05.11.

Minor deficiency (3 points) if:
· Single/isolated instance(s) where commodities, packaging, etc. are not rotated using FIFO policy.

Major deficiency (1 point) if:
· Numerous instances where commodities, packaging, etc. are not rotated using FIFO policy.

Non-compliance (0 points) if:
· Widespread failure to use FIFO policy on commodities, packaging, etc.

PGFS-R-063                                    Page 32 of 90  October 8, 2021
©2021 Primus Group, Inc. All rights reserved                 Rev. 1

3.05.13: Does the process flow, facility layout, worker control, utensil control, internal vehicle use,
etc. ensure that finished goods are not contaminated by raw materials (e.g., seeds, transplants,
soil, media)?
Total compliance (15 Points): Raw materials should not be a source of contamination to the growing area
and/or finished goods. There should be plenty of space and separation to help avoid cross contamination
issues. Workers who handle raw products should not then handle packaged products without first
ensuring that they are free of raw material contaminants. This should include hand washing, glove
change etc., but might also include changing into a new set of garments; ideally workers should be
dedicated to handling raw or packaged goods, but not both within a shift. Utensils, cleaning implements,
internal vehicles etc. should not be allowed to be vectors for cross contamination; ideally dedicated coded
equipment should be provided for raw and processed goods. Failing this, there should be equipment
sanitation steps between uses.

Minor deficiency (10 points) if:
· Single/isolated instance(s) of worker/utensil/internal vehicle cross contamination.
· Minor process issues where packaged materials come into the same area as raw materials, but the

     two products do not touch in any way, i.e. no potential risk of cross contamination.
· Some potential space issues where the process flow is being forced to bring packaged and raw

     materials into close proximity.

Major deficiency (5 points) if:
· Numerous instances of worker/utensil cross contamination.
· Serious process flow issues where raw material can potentially cross contaminate packaged goods.
· Numerous space issues where the process flow is being forced to bring packaged and raw materials

     into close proximity.

Non-compliance (0 points) if:
· Widespread issues with worker and/or utensil cross contamination.
· Process flow issues are observed to result in product raw/packaged goods cross contamination.

3.05.14: Is there proper storage and adequate separation of raw materials (e.g. seeds, transplants,
soil, media), products and packaging?
Total compliance (15 points): All raw materials, products and packaging should be stored off the ground
(i.e. on racks, pallets, shelves, etc.). Materials should be properly protected during storage to prevent
contamination (e.g., away from chemicals, battery chargers, etc.). Raw materials, finished product and
packaging materials should be stored in separate areas to prevent cross contamination. When separate
room storage is not possible, the auditor should assess the risks, especially with respect to cross
contamination. Raw materials should not be able to contaminate packaged items. Packaging storage,
especially dust from cardboard storage should not contaminate produce items.

Minor deficiency (10 points) if:
· Single/isolated instance(s) of products or packaging materials stored on the floor or not protected

     properly.
· Single instance of a pallet or boxes/bags of packaged product stored too close to raw product.

Major deficiency (5 points) if:
· Numerous instances of products or packaging materials not protected properly.
· Numerous instances of products or packaging materials stored directly on the ground.
· Isolated instances (no more than three) of raw product stored in the same room as packaged product

     where there is not adequate physical separation and demarcation within the room.

Non-compliance (0 points) if:
· Different food items being stored together in a way that poses a cross contamination risk.
· Widespread storage of product or packaging materials directly on the ground.

PGFS-R-063                                    Page 33 of 90  October 8, 2021
©2021 Primus Group, Inc. All rights reserved                 Rev. 1

· Numerous instances of raw product and packaged product stored in the same room without adequate
     segregation.

3.05.15: Are all exposed materials (product, packaging, etc.) protected from overhead
contamination (e.g. ladders, motors, condensation, lubricants, walkways, loose panels, degrading
insulation, etc.)?
Total compliance (15 points): Ceilings and/or any overhead fixtures above exposed materials are free
from condensation or dust. Ladders or walkways (catwalks) above exposed product or packaging material
have kick plates at least 3.5 inches high and are covered in some way that protects the product
underneath. Drips or condensate (e.g., from roof, fixtures, ducts, pipes, etc.) should not contaminate food,
food contact surfaces or packaging material. Adequate measures should be in place to protect from
condensate.

OSHA: CFR 29 Part 1910k(1)(iii)
https://www.osha.gov/pls/oshaweb/owadisp.show_document?p_table=STANDARDS&p_id=9721

Minor deficiency (10 points) if:
· Single/isolated instance(s) of possible overhead contamination.

Major deficiency (5 points) if:
· Numerous instances of possible overhead contamination

Non-compliance (0 points) if:
· No protective devices have been installed to eliminate potential contamination.
· Any observation of direct contamination of raw materials, work in progress, finished product,

     or packaging materials. In this case the score reverts back to 3.05.10.

3.05.16: Are all growing areas clean and well maintained; especially lights, ducts, fans, floor areas
by walls and equipment, and other hard to reach areas?
Total compliance (10 points): All areas should be maintained in a clean and sanitary state. Auditors
should check the ceilings, lights, corners, against walls and alongside equipment (look up, look down,
look all around). Inside light covers should be clean, free of algae, insects and excessive dirt.
This question is designed to capture any hygiene issues that are not covered by specific issues noted in
other questions. Auditors should carefully note which areas are dirty when down scoring in this question.

Minor deficiency (7 points) if:
· Single/isolated instance(s) of floors, walls, ledges or other areas being unclean.
· Single/isolated instance(s) of dirty lights/light covers.

Major deficiency (3 points) if:
· Numerous instances of floors, walls, ledges or other areas being unclean.
· Numerous instances of dirty lights/light covers.

Non-compliance (0 points) if:
· Production areas very dirty ­ little or no evidence of cleaning occurring.
· Widespread failure to maintain lights/light covers in a clean condition.

3.05.17: Are single service containers used for their intended purpose only so that potential cross
contamination is prevented?
Total compliance (5 points): Single service containers are used for their intended purpose only (food
contact use, not to hold nuts, bolts, trash or other miscellaneous items) and should not be re-used.
Returnable plastic containers (RPCs) (e.g., CHEP, IFCO) should be treated like single service containers
and only used for product. If a single service container is used for any other reason than the storage and
distribution of food, it should be clearly differentiated as such (e.g., painted another color and labeled).
Non-applicable if single use containers are not used in the operation.

PGFS-R-063                                    Page 34 of 90  October 8, 2021
©2021 Primus Group, Inc. All rights reserved                 Rev. 1

Minor deficiency (3 points) if:
· Single/isolated instance(s) of single service containers used for other than intended purpose.

Major deficiency (1 point) if:
· Numerous instance(s) of single service containers used for other than intended purpose.

Non-compliance (0 points) if:
· Widespread misuse of single services containers used for other than intended purpose.

3.05.18: Are re-usable containers cleanable or used with a liner and clearly designated for the
specific purpose (finished product, trash, etc.) such that cross contamination is prevented?
Total compliance (5 points): All re-usable containers should be able to be cleaned or used with a clean
liner to protect against contamination. Cleaning type and frequency should be determined based on the
products and processes involved. Bins, boxes, hoppers, barrels, baskets, etc. used for the storage of raw
materials (e.g., seeds, transplants, soil, media), finished goods or packaging should be kept in a clean
state. The storage of these items should ensure that they remain clean and uncontaminated (e.g.,
covered clean). In-house re-usable containers should be labeled or color-coded (visually or in the
language understood by the workers) so that their designated purpose can be easily identified.
Returnable plastic containers (RPCs) (e.g., CHEP, IFCO) should be treated like single service containers
and only used for product (score in 3.05.17). If the trash container is the only re-used container on site
and is a specific and unique design, so that it cannot be mistaken for another use, then it should not be
down scored. Non-applicable if re-usable containers are not used in the operation.

Minor deficiency (3 points) if:
· Single/isolated instance(s) of a dirty product storage container (there is no direct product

     contamination).
· Single/isolated instance(s) product storage container is clean but being stored in an area where it

     might be contaminated and then used.
· Single/isolated instance(s) of a re-usable container not labeled or color-coded.

Major deficiency (1 point) if:
· Numerous instances of dirty product storage containers (there is no direct product contamination).
· Numerous product storage containers, which are clean, but are being stored in an area where they

     might be contaminated and then used.
· Numerous instances of re-usable containers not properly labeled or color-coded.

Non-compliance (0 points) if:
· Widespread failure to clean food storage containers.
· There is no cleaning program for the containers.
· Widespread lack of control with respect to storage of clean food storage containers.
· Re-usable containers are used for multiple purposes without the containers being labeled or color-

     coded.

3.05.19: Are all utensils, hoses, and other items not being used, stored clean and in a manner to
prevent contamination?
Total compliance (10 points): All utensils, hoses and other items not being used are stored clean, and in a
manner to prevent contamination (off ground, dedicated areas, etc.). Hoses should be stored coiled, off
the floor and ideally used in such a manner that ground contact is avoided.

Minor deficiency (7 points) if:
· Single/isolated instance(s) of items not in use stored inappropriately. There is little potential hazard to

     product or packaging.

Major deficiency (3 points) if:

PGFS-R-063                                    Page 35 of 90  October 8, 2021
©2021 Primus Group, Inc. All rights reserved                 Rev. 1

· Numerous instances of items not in use, stored inappropriately. There is little potential hazard to
     product or packaging.

Non-compliance (0 points) if:
· Any items not in use stored in a manner that may contaminate product or packaging.

3.05.20: Are floor drains covered, do they appear clean, free from odors, in good repair, and flow
in a manner that prevents contamination (e.g., from high to low risk areas, from high risk directly
to drain system)?
Total compliance (5 points):
· All facility floor drains, including covers and internal channels are clean, and free of decayed/old

     material.
· Drains flow from high to low risk areas, from high risk directly to drain system.
· All facility floor drains are free of odors.
· There is no overflow or excessive standing water in the floor drains.
· Drains should have smooth walls and bases that allow free flow of water without catching debris, and

     also aid in the cleaning of the drains.
· Water from refrigeration drip pans is drained and disposed of away from product and product contact

     surfaces.

Where possible, auditor should request floor drain covers to be removed for inspection. Use a flashlight to
illuminate the bottom of deep drains. Non-applicable if floor drains are not present or used in the
operation.

Minor deficiency (3 points) if:
· Single/isolated instance(s) of a facility floor drain that is failing in one of the requirements listed

     above.

Major deficiency (1 point) if:
· Numerous instances of facility floor drains that are not maintained under acceptable sanitary

     conditions.
· Numerous instances of facility floor drains that are failing in one of the requirements listed above.

Non-compliance (0 points) if:
· Widespread failure to maintain the facility floor drains in a clean condition.

3.05.21: Are internal transport vehicles (e.g., forklifts, bobcats, pallet jacks, carts, floor cleaners,
etc.), clean, do not emit toxic fumes and are being used in a sanitary manner?
Total compliance (5 points) if:
· Vehicles and equipment used for moving raw materials, packaged products, and packaging

     throughout and within the facility are clean, well maintained, and do not transport goods outside the
     facility (unless cleaned and sanitized before re-entering). Open dock areas are accepted as being
     within the facility in this instance.
· Internal transport vehicles (forklifts, bobcats (or similar type vehicle), pallet jacks, carts, floor cleaners,
     etc.) used to transport food are in a good state of repair, clean, odor free, free of rodents and insects.
· Internal transport vehicles (forklifts, bobcats (or similar type vehicle), pallet jacks, carts, floor cleaners,
     etc.) used in food areas should not be gasoline or diesel powered; propane (LPG) powered vehicles
     are permitted although electric powered are ideal. Trucks and forklifts should not be left idling in
     enclosed spaces or during loading or unloading of products to reduce health risk and possible tainting
     of foods.
· A sanitation program for internal transport vehicles is established to assure proper sanitation levels.
· Internal transport vehicles should not be mobile "break areas" i.e. food and drink should not be stored
     on the vehicles.

PGFS-R-063                                    Page 36 of 90  October 8, 2021
©2021 Primus Group, Inc. All rights reserved                 Rev. 1

· Floor cleaners should be kept in good condition and cleaned in order to prevent cross contamination.
     Where relevant, the brushes and fixtures on the floor cleaner might need to be changed or cleaned
     when moving from one risk area to another.

Non-applicable if internal transport vehicles are not used in the operation

Minor deficiency (3 points) if:
· Single/isolated instance(s) of finding the issues mentioned above.

Major deficiency (1 point) if:
· Numerous instances of finding the issues mentioned above.

Non-compliance (0 points) if:
· Widespread failure to maintain the transport vehicles in a clean and sanitary condition.
· Widespread use of gasoline or diesel-powered vehicles in food areas.
· Multiple instances of failure to maintain the transport vehicles in a sanitary condition that may lead to

     potential product contamination.
· The auditor should consider whether the issue is adulteration and should be applied to Q

     3.05.10 and scored as an automatic failure.

Inspection

3.06.01: Is there documented evidence of the internal audits performed, detailing findings and
corrective actions?
Total compliance (15 points): There should be records of the internal audits performed at each operation,
with the frequency defined in the internal audit program. Frequency depends on the type and size of the
operation. The records should include the date of the audit, name of the internal auditor, justification for
the answers, (not just checked  or all Y/N), detail any deficiencies found and the corrective action(s)
taken. An audit checklist (ideally PrimusGFS) should be used that covers all areas of the PrimusGFS
audit, including growing area, storage area, worker amenities, external areas, worker practices, etc. No
down score if another audit checklist is used, as long as all areas are covered. See also 1.04.01
regarding internal audit program requirements.
Frequency Details for Farm, Indoor Agriculture and Harvest Crew: at least a pre-season growing area
assessment and a full GAP self-assessment during harvest season covering growing and harvesting
operations should be on file. If growing and harvest activities are under the same organizational authority
the self-assessment should be on file covering both growing and harvesting and conducted during the
harvest season. A harvesting company not under the authority of a grower should have self-assessments
on file during harvest season covering each type of harvest process utilized for the crew(s), i.e. crew can
harvest product in-field semi-processing and bulk/final packing in the growing area. A more frequent self-
assessment frequency should be used depending on the crop type, farm or indoor agriculture location,
any associated risk pressures, and/or if required by any national, local or importing country legal
requirements, or customer requirements. These factors will also affect the need for pre-harvest
inspections. Farm(s), indoor agriculture growing area(s), storage, harvesting, worker and visitor hygiene,
agricultural water sources, training program, etc., and all associated paperwork should be included.

Minor Deficiency (10 points) if:
· Single/isolated instance(s) of follow up/corrective actions not noted.
· Single/isolated instance(s) of incomplete answers or missing records.
· Single/isolated instance(s) of areas/issues missing on the inspection.

Major Deficiency (5 points) if:
· Numerous instances of follow up/corrective actions not noted.
· Numerous instances of incomplete answers or missing records.
· Inspection frequency is not adequate relative to the type of business and the number of issues that

     require monitoring.
· Numerous instances of areas/issues missing on the inspection.

PGFS-R-063                                    Page 37 of 90  October 8, 2021
©2021 Primus Group, Inc. All rights reserved                 Rev. 1

Non-compliance (0 points) if:
· Fundamental failure to maintain records.
· Fundamental failure to complete inspection records with detailed responses.
· No documented internal audits have been performed.

3.06.02: Is there a daily inspection log, including but not limited to, checking worker hygiene,
housekeeping of bathrooms, break area, growing area, and storage area?
Total compliance (10 points): Operations are inspected daily. This should be a start-up check of all
potential issues.
The daily inspection should include:
· General housekeeping of storage areas, growing areas, break areas and bathrooms.
· Checking personnel meet the hygiene requirements
· Corrective actions in case of non-compliance.

Minor Deficiency (7 points) if:
· Single/isolated instance(s) of omissions or incorrect data in the records.

Major Deficiency (3 points) if:
· Numerous instances of omissions or incorrect data in the records.
· Persistent repetition of corrective action without long-term solution.

Non-compliance (0 points) if:
· No records.
· Failure to maintain records.

Training

3.07.01: Is there a food safety hygiene training program covering new and existing workers and
are there records of these training events?
Total compliance (15 points): There should be a formal training program to inform all workers (including
planting and weeding crews) of the current policies and requirements of the company regarding hygiene.
Trainings should be in the language understood by the workers, and training type and intensity should
reflect the risks associated with the products/processes. Frequency should be at the start of the season
before starting work and then some topics covered at least quarterly, but ideally monthly. Full annual food
safety refresher training sessions are encouraged but do not replace the ongoing more frequent training.
Training material covering the content of the company policies and requirements regarding food safety
and hygiene (3.01.03) and training should cover food safety and hygiene topics (e.g. toilet use, hand
washing, protective clothing (where applicable), recognizing and reporting injury and illness, blood and
other bodily fluids, jewelry, dropped product, animal intrusion, food consumption/taking breaks, foreign
material requirements, food defense, etc.), the importance of recognizing and detecting food safety and/or
hygiene issues with co-workers and visitors, and all food safety or hygiene issues for which they are
responsible (e.g. recognizing contaminated produce that should not be harvested, inspecting harvest
containers and equipment for contamination issues), correcting problems and reporting problems to a
supervisor. Workers should also be trained on any new practices and/or procedures and when any new
information on best practices becomes available. There should be records of training with date of training,
clearly defined topic(s) covered, trainer(s), material(s) used/given, and the names and signatures of
workers trained. Training provided and associated records should meet all local and national regulations.

Minor Deficiency (10 points) if:
· Single/isolated instance(s) of logs having errors or incomplete information e.g. missing one of the

     following: training topic, trainer or material information.
· Training does not include the importance of recognizing food safety and/or hygiene issues with co-

     workers and visitors and/or correcting problems and reporting problems to a supervisor.

PGFS-R-063                                    Page 38 of 90  October 8, 2021
©2021 Primus Group, Inc. All rights reserved                 Rev. 1

· Training has occurred but, on a few occasions, full attendance logs have not been kept and/or not all
     workers were covered.

· Training materials and/or company food safety policy are not in the relevant language(s).
· Training occurring, not before starting to work but within the first week.
· Single/isolated instance(s) of workers not being trained or not signing a document stating that they

     will comply with the operation's food safety hygiene program.

Major Deficiency (5 points) if:
· Numerous instances of logs having errors or incomplete information e.g. missing one of the following:

     training topic, trainer or material information.
· Training has occurred but, on many occasions, full attendance logs have not been maintained.
· Up to three key topics e.g. hand washing, reporting injury/illness, blood and other bodily fluids,

     jewelry, dropped produce, animal intrusion, etc., have been omitted from the training.
· Only annual refresher training has occurred, and the operation runs for more than 3 months of the

     year.
· Numerous cases of workers not signing a document stating that they will comply with the operations'

     food safety hygiene program.
· Training occurring, not before starting to work but within the first month.
· Numerous instances of workers not being trained.

Non-compliance (0 points) if:
· Failure to maintain records.
· No records of training or workers not being trained.
· More than three key topics e.g. hand washing, reporting injury/illness, blood and other bodily fluids,

     jewelry, dropped produce, animal intrusion, etc., have been omitted from the training program
· No specific orientation given or given after the worker has been working for more than one month.

3.07.02: Is there a documented training program with training logs for the sanitation workers,
including best practices and chemical use details?
Total compliance (5 points): Sanitation training should ensure that the workers understand the importance
of proper sanitation, cleaning efficacy, how to use the cleaning chemicals and how to understand
Sanitation Standard Operating Procedures. Unless sanitation workers attend regular food safety trainings,
sanitation training should also include elements of food safety training pertinent to sanitation operations
(e.g., hand washing, restroom use, foreign material, etc.). Training logs should have a clearly defined
topic(s) covered, trainer(s) and material(s) used/given and who attended the training (name and
signature). Training would also ideally include worker safety issues (e.g., use of personal protective
equipment, accident prevention, what to do in case of an accident, procedures for avoiding electrical
hazards when cleaning, etc.). Recorded training should occur at least on a 12-month basis.

Minor Deficiency (3 points) if:
· Single/isolated instance(s) of logs having errors or incomplete information e.g. missing one of the

     following: training topic, trainer or material information.
· Training has occurred, but on a few occasions full attendance logs have not been kept and/or not all

     workers were covered.

Major Deficiency (1 points) if:
· Numerous instances of logs having errors or incomplete information e.g. missing one of the following:

     training topic, trainer or material information.
· Training has occurred but, on many occasions, full attendance logs have not been maintained.

Non-compliance (0 points)
· No records or no training has occurred.
· Failure to maintain records.

PGFS-R-063                                    Page 39 of 90  October 8, 2021
©2021 Primus Group, Inc. All rights reserved                 Rev. 1

3.07.03: Are there written and communicated procedures in place that require food handlers to
report any cuts or grazes and/or if they are suffering any illnesses that might be a contamination
risk to the products being produced, and return to work requirements? (In countries with health
privacy/confidentiality laws, e.g. USA, auditors can check procedure/policy but not the actual
records).
Total compliance (10 points): There should be documented procedures that are communicated (e.g.,
worker signature on a training log) to food handlers, requiring them to report any cuts, grazes and/or any
illnesses that might be a food safety cross contamination risk. The procedures should indicate return to
work requirements for affected workers: to whom the food handlers should report, how the issue is
recorded and appropriate actions to be taken for a particular issue. Auditors should not request to review
records where countries have laws covering privacy/confidentiality of health records, and therefore a
verbal confirmation should be gained.

Minor deficiency (7 points) if:
· Single/isolated instance(s) of errors or omissions in procedure.
· Single/isolated instance(s) of evidence that workers are unaware of the procedure requirements.

Major deficiency (3 points) if:
· Numerous instances of errors or omissions in the procedure.
· Numerous instances of evidence that workers are unaware of procedure requirements.

Non-compliance (0 points) if:
· There is not a documented procedure in place.
· A procedure is in place, but it has not been communicated to food handlers.

3.07.04: Are there worker food safety non-conformance records and associated corrective actions
(including retraining records)?
Total compliance (3 points): There should be a disciplinary system in place. A worker non-conformance
should be recorded when workers are found not following food safety requirements. The auditee should
have a record for worker non-compliance, corrective actions and evidence that retraining has occurred
(where relevant). Auditee records might be viewed as confidential, and therefore, a verbal confirmation
should be gained. There might be a tier system, which includes re-training, verbal and written disciplinary
actions and allowance for immediate termination for gross misconduct.

Minor Deficiency (2 points) if:
 · Single/isolated instance(s) of follow up/corrective action not noted.

Major Deficiency (1 point) if:
· Numerous instance(s) of follow up/corrective actions not noted.

Non-compliance (0 points) if:
· No records or no disciplinary system.
· Widespread failure to record follow up/corrective actions.

Worker Hygiene

3.08.01: Are toilet facilities adequate in number and location? A ZERO POINT (NON-COMPLIANCE)
DOWN SCORE IN THIS QUESTION RESULTS IN AUTOMATIC FAILURE OF THIS AUDIT.
Total compliance (15 points):

     · Toilet facilities should be available to all workers and visitors, while work is actively occurring.
     · At least one toilet per 20 workers should be provided, or if more stringent, as per prevailing

          national/ local guidelines.
Toilet facility placement should be within Ľ mile or 5 minutes walking distance of where workers are
located, or if more stringent, as per prevailing national/ local guidelines. A 5 minute drive is not
acceptable, while work is actively occurring with groups of three or more workers. Where there are two or

PGFS-R-063                                    Page 40 of 90  October 8, 2021
©2021 Primus Group, Inc. All rights reserved                 Rev. 1

less workers present (e.g., spray activities, irrigation check) and workers have transportation that is
immediately available to toilets within a 5 minute drive, it is acceptable to score as total compliance.
Doors should not open directly into areas where food is exposed to airborne contamination, i.e. storage
and growing areas. Use of double doors or having a positive airflow system is accepted.

United States Department of Labor 1928 Title Field Sanitation
https://www.osha.gov/laws-regs/regulations/standardnumber/1928/1928.110
21 CFR Part 110.37 https://www.accessdata.fda.gov/scripts/cdrh/cfdocs/cfcfr/CFRSearch.cfm?fr=110.37

Minor deficiency (10 points) if:
· The toilet facilities are not within Ľ mile or 5 minutes walking distance for crews of three or more.
· The toilet facilities are not within a 5 minute driving distance for crews of two or less.
· Operation has door(s) opening into the production areas, i.e. not located in the amenity area or office

     area and are self-closing (e.g., use a spring-loaded door).

Major deficiency (5 points) if:
· The operation is not meeting the 1 toilet per 20 workers criteria.
· Operation has door(s) opening into the production areas, i.e. not located in the amenity area or office

     area and are not self-closing (e.g., use a spring-loaded door).

     Automatic failure (0 points) if:
· There are insufficient or inadequate toilet facilities.

3.08.01a: Are toilet facilities in a suitable location to prevent contamination to product, packaging,
equipment, and growing areas?
Total compliance (15 points): Placement of toilet facilities should be in a suitable location to prevent
contamination to product, packaging, equipment, water sources, and growing areas. Consideration
should be given when portable units are used so that they are not situated too close to the edge of the
crop and have a minimum 15 ft (4.5 m) buffer distance in the event of a spill or leak. If pit toilets are used,
consider proximity to crop and water sources.

Minor deficiency (10 points) if:
· Option for minor down score exists but at present, no known good examples exist.

Major deficiency (5 points) if:
· Toilet facilities pose a potential risk to product, packaging and equipment areas.

Non-compliance (0 points) if:
· Toilet facilities are located too close to the growing area or water source.

3.08.01b: Are toilet facilities designed and maintained to prevent contamination (e.g., free from
leaks and cracks)?
Total compliance (5 points): Toilet facilities should be free from cracks and leaks and any waste holding
tanks from toilets must be designed and maintained properly to prevent contamination. Waste holding
tanks should be free of leaks, cracks and constructed of durable materials (e.g. plastic) that will not
degrade or decompose (no wood). Each toilet should be ventilated to outside air. Note: pit toilets cannot
be considered to be properly designed to prevent contamination.
https://www.waterpathogens.org/book/pit-toilets-latrines
Minor deficiency (3 points) if:
· Single observation of one of the waste holding tank(s) not designed or maintained improperly.
· Single observation of toilet facility not being well maintained (e.g. cracks, holes, leaks) or not vented

     to outside air.

Major deficiency (1 point) if:
· More than one observation of the waste holding tank(s) designed or maintained improperly.

PGFS-R-063                                    Page 41 of 90  October 8, 2021
©2021 Primus Group, Inc. All rights reserved                 Rev. 1

· More than one observation of a toilet facility not being well maintained (e.g. cracks, holes, leaks) or
     not vented to outside air.

Non-compliance (0 points) if:
· Waste holding tank(s) poses a risk of contamination to the growing area, product, packaging, and

     equipment, such as observing leaks or being improperly constructed.
· Failure to provide adequately maintained toilet facilities.

3.08.01c: Are toilet facilities constructed of materials that are easy to clean?
Total compliance (3 points): Toilet facilities should be constructed of non-porous materials that are easy
to clean and sanitize. The floors, walls, ceiling, partitions and doors should be made of a finish that can
be easily cleaned.
Minor Deficiency (2 points) if:
· Single/isolated instance of toilet facilities not being constructed of non-porous materials.

Major Deficiency (1 point) if:
· Numerous instances of toilet facilities not being constructed of non-porous materials.

Non- compliance (0 points) if:
· Toilets are not constructed of non-porous materials.

3.08.01d: Are the toilet facility materials constructed of a light color allowing easy evaluation of
cleaning performance?
Total compliance (3 points): Toilet facilities should be constructed of materials light in color, allowing easy
evaluation of cleaning performance.

Minor Deficiency (2 points) if:
· Single/isolated instance of toilets not being constructed of light materials.

Major Deficiency (1 point) if:
· Numerous instances of toilets not being constructed of light materials.

Non- compliance (0 points) if:
· Toilets are not constructed of light materials.

3.08.01e: Are toilets supplied with toilet paper and is the toilet paper maintained properly (e.g.,
toilet paper rolls are not stored on the floor or in the urinals)?
Total compliance (5 points): Toilet paper should be provided in a suitable holder in each toilet facility.
Toilet paper should be maintained properly (e.g., toilet paper rolls are not stored on the floor, sink or in
the urinals).

Minor Deficiency (3 points) if:
· Single/isolated instance of toilet paper rolls not being maintained properly (e.g., stored on the floor,

     sink or in the urinals).

Major Deficiency (1 point) if:
· Numerous instances of toilet paper rolls not being maintained properly (e.g., stored on the floor, sink

     or in the urinals).
· One of the toilet facilities is out of toilet paper and has not been restocked.

Non- compliance (0 points) if:
· There was no toilet paper available at the time of the audit.

PGFS-R-063                                    Page 42 of 90  October 8, 2021
©2021 Primus Group, Inc. All rights reserved                 Rev. 1

3.08.01f: Where used, is there a documented procedure for emptying the waste holding tanks in a
hygienic manner and also in a way that prevents product, packaging, equipment, water systems
and growing area contamination?
Total compliance (5 points): If toilets have waste holding tanks, they should be emptied, pumped, and
cleaned in a manner to avoid contamination to product, packaging, equipment, water systems and
growing area(s). Equipment used in emptying/pumping must be in good working order. A documented
procedure should exist and should include a response plan for major leaks or spills, as well as indicating
where pumped waste is disposed of and requiring communication to the designated person(s)
responsible for the food safety program regarding the actions taken when a major leak or spill occurred.

Minor Deficiency (3 points) if:
· Single/isolated instance(s) of incomplete or missing details in the procedure.

Major Deficiency (1 point) if:
· Numerous instances of incomplete or missing details in the procedure.

Non-compliance (0 points) if:
· There is no documented procedure.

3.08.01g: Are the toilet facilities and hand washing stations clean and are there records showing
cleaning, servicing and stocking is occurring regularly?
Total compliance (15 points): Toilet facilities and hand washing stations should be cleaned and sanitized
on a regular basis. Servicing records (either contracted or in-house) should be available for review
showing toilet cleaning, servicing and stocking is occurring regularly. Soiled tissue should be flushed
down the toilet/placed in the holding tank (not placed in trash cans and/or on the floor).

· Toilet facility (including hand washing stations) fixtures are in good operating condition and clean.
· Cleaning and sanitizing is occurring on a regular basis.
· No soiled toilet tissue either on the floor or in trash cans.
· Trash cans are available for hand wash paper towels.
· Hand washing stations are clean and not blocked.

Minor deficiency (10 points) if:
· Single/isolated instance(s) of non-compliance to above requirements.
· Single/isolated instance(s) of soiled toilet tissues being placed in trash can.
· Single/isolated instance(s) of incomplete or missing records.

Major deficiency (5 points) if:
· Numerous instances of non-compliance to the above requirements.
· Widespread observation of soiled toilet tissues being placed in trash cans.
· Numerous instances of incomplete or missing records.

Non-compliance (0 points) if:
· Failure to properly maintain areas.
· Single instance of soiled toilet tissues being left on the floor of the toilet facility.
· No cleaning and service records available.

3.08.02: Is hand washing signage posted appropriately?
Total compliance (5 points): Toilet facilities should have hand washing signs as a reminder to wash
hands before and after eating, returning to work and after using the toilet. Signs need to be posted visibly
and in the language of the workers (picture signs are allowed). The signs should be permanent and
placed in key areas where workers can easily see them.

Minor deficiency (3 points) if:
· Single/isolated instance of signage not being permanent.

PGFS-R-063                                    Page 43 of 90  October 8, 2021
©2021 Primus Group, Inc. All rights reserved                 Rev. 1

· Single/isolated instance of signage not being in the language of the workers.
· Single/isolated instance of signage not posted visibly.

Major deficiency (1 point) if:
· Numerous instances of signage not being permanent.
· Numerous instances of signage not being in the language of the workers.
· Numerous instances of signage not posted visibly.

Non-compliance (0 points) if:
· There is no signage.

3.08.03: Are hand washing stations adequate in number and appropriately located for worker
access and monitoring usage? A ZERO POINT (NON-COMPLIANCE) DOWNSCORE IN THIS
QUESTION RESULTS IN AUTOMATIC FAILURE OF THIS AUDIT.
Total compliance (15 points): An adequate number of hand washing stations, in working order, should be
provided to ensure efficient worker flow (1 per 20 people on site), and available to all workers and visitors.
Hands free is an optimum system. Hand washing stations should be visible and located within close
proximity of toilet facilities and 1/4 mile or 5 minutes walking distance of where workers are located.
United States Department of Labor 29 CFR 1910.141(c)(1)(i): Toilet Facilities
http://www.osha.gov/pls/oshaweb/owadisp.show_document?p_table=STANDARDS&p_id=9790

Minor deficiency (10 points) if:
· Only about 75% of needed hand washing stations are present.

Major deficiency (5 points) if:
· Only about 50% of needed hand washing stations are present.

Automatic failure (0 points) if:
· Hand washing stations are inadequate in both number and location (less than 25% of the

     needed hand washing stations are provided).
· There are no functioning hand wash stations.

3.08.03a: Are the hand wash stations in working order (no leaks, free of clogged drains, etc.,) and
restricted to hand washing purposes only?
Total Compliance (15 points): Hand wash stations should be free of clogged drains, designed and
maintained properly to capture or control rinse water that could cause contamination onto product,
packaging, equipment and growing area(s).

Minor Deficiency (10 points) if:
· Single/isolated instance of hand wash stations not draining properly.
· Single instance of hand washing station being used for another purpose.

Major Deficiency (5 point) if:
· Numerous instances of hand wash stations not draining properly.
· More than one instance of a hand washing station being used for another purpose.

Non- compliance (0 points) if:
· Fundamental failure for hand wash stations to drain properly.
· Fundamental failure for hand wash stations not containing a system to catch the rinse water.

3.08.03b: Are hand wash stations clearly visible (e.g., situated outside the toilet facility) and easily
accessible to workers?
Total compliance (5 points): Hand wash stations should be clearly visible (i.e. situated outside the toilet
facility) in order to verify hand washing activities, and easily accessible to workers.

PGFS-R-063                                    Page 44 of 90  October 8, 2021
©2021 Primus Group, Inc. All rights reserved                 Rev. 1

Minor Deficiency (3 points) if:
· Single/isolated instance of a hand wash station located inside a toilet facility.

Major Deficiency (1 point) if:
· Numerous instances of hand wash stations located inside the toilet facilities.

Non- compliance (0 points) if:
· All hand wash stations are located inside the toilet facilities.

3.08.03c: Are hand wash stations adequately stocked with unscented soap and paper towels?
Total compliance (5 points): All hand washing facilities should be properly stocked with liquid
unscented/non-perfumed, neutral or antiseptic soap. Single use paper towels should be used and units
properly located. There should be an adequate stock of soap and paper towels.

Minor Deficiency (3 points) if:
· Single/isolated instance of a hand wash station out of soap and/or paper towels.

Major Deficiency (1 point) if:
· Numerous instances of hand wash stations out of soap and/or paper towels.

Non- compliance (0 points) if:
· There is no soap and/or paper towels available to workers.

3.08.04: Are total coliforms (TC) and generic E. coli tests conducted on the water used for hand
washing at the required and/or expected frequency?
Total compliance (15 points): Total coliforms (TC) and generic E. coli testing should occur prior to use and
at least annually. Water samples should be taken from as close to the point of use as is practical e.g.
hand wash spigot/faucet. If there are multiple hand wash units, then samples should be taken from a
different location each test (randomize or rotate locations). If there are multiple sources for hand wash
water, testing should also account for each source used.
Reference:
https://extension.psu.edu/coliform-bacteria
https://safewater.zendesk.com/hc/en-us/sections/202366208-Total-Coliforms
https://www.govinfo.gov/content/pkg/CFR-2011-title40-vol23/pdf/CFR-2011-title40-vol23-part141.pdf
https://www.epa.gov/dwstandardsregulations

Minor deficiency (10 points) if:
· Single instance of water testing not occurring at the right frequency.
· Sample(s) was not taken from the closest practical point of use.
· A single water source (where there is more than one) has not been tested.

Major deficiency (5 points) if:
· Numerous instances of water testing not occurring at the right frequency.
· More than one water source (where there are more than two) has not been tested.

Non-compliance (0 points):
· No microbiological test results are available.
· Last test was done over 12 months ago.

3.08.04a: Do written procedures (SOPs) exist covering proper sampling protocols, which include
where samples should be taken and how samples should be identified?
Total compliance (10 points): There should be a documented procedure in place detailing how water
samples are to be taken, including stating how samples should be identified i.e. clearly naming the
location that the sample was taken, identifying the hand wash station, the water source and the date.

PGFS-R-063                                    Page 45 of 90  October 8, 2021
©2021 Primus Group, Inc. All rights reserved                 Rev. 1

Minor Deficiency (7 points) if:
· Single/isolated instance(s) of incomplete or missing details in the procedure.

Major Deficiency (3 points) if:
· Numerous instances of incomplete or missing details in the procedure.

Non-compliance (0 points) if:
· There is no documented procedure.

3.08.04b: Do written procedures (SOPs) exist covering corrective measures for unsuitable or
abnormal water testing results?
Total compliance (10 points): Written procedures (SOPs) should exist covering corrective measures, not
only for the discovery of unsuitable or abnormal water testing results, but also as a preparation on how to
handle such findings.

Minor Deficiency (7 points) if:
· Single/isolated instance(s) of incomplete or missing details in the procedure.

Major Deficiency (3 points) if:
· Numerous instances of incomplete or missing details in the procedure.

Non-compliance (0 points) if:
· There is no documented procedure.

3.08.04c: If unsuitable or abnormal results have been detected, have documented corrective
measures been performed?
Total compliance (15 points): For total coliforms (TC) and generic E. coli, there should be negative or <
detection limit (MPN or CFU/100mL). Where thresholds have been exceeded, there should be recorded
corrective actions, including investigations and water retests.

Minor Deficiency (10 points) if:
· Single/isolated instance(s) of records showing unsuitable or abnormal test results for total coliforms

     without adequate documented corrective actions.

Major Deficiency (5 points) if:
· Numerous instances of records showing unsuitable or abnormal test results for total coliforms without

     adequate documented corrective actions.

Non-compliance (0 points) if:
· No corrective actions have been performed.
· A single out of specification result for generic E. coli without proper corrective actions.

3.08.05: Are workers washing and sanitizing their hands before starting work each day, after using
the restroom, after breaks, before putting on gloves and whenever hands may be contaminated?
Total compliance (15 points): Worker conformance to hand washing and sanitizing procedures should be
assessed, as washing hands is the first step in avoiding food contamination. Workers should be observed
washing their hands prior to beginning work, after breaks, after using the toilet, before putting on gloves,
and whenever hands may have become a source of contamination (e.g., after eating, after using a
handkerchief or tissue, smoking, drinking, etc.).
Auditors are expected to view hand washing disciplines ­ in operations where hand washing stations are
not visible, this means watching worker movements after breaks (are they using the toilet facility hand
wash stations); are there signs of soap and paper towel use? Hand washing is a critical part of the food
suppliers' food safety program ­ this should be stressed to the auditee.

Potentially useful website:

PGFS-R-063                                    Page 46 of 90  October 8, 2021
©2021 Primus Group, Inc. All rights reserved                 Rev. 1

A "Safe Hands" Hand Wash Program, https://sproutnet.com/hand-washing-program/
Minor deficiency (10 points) if:
· Single/isolated instance(s) of a worker who is not complying with the hand washing policy.

Major deficiency (5 points) if:
· Numerous instances of workers that are not complying with the hand washing policy.

Non-compliance (0 points) if:
· Majority of or fundamental failure of workers to comply with hand washing policies.

3.08.06: Are secondary hand sanitation stations (e.g., touch-free dispensers) adequate in number
and location, and are the stations properly maintained?
Total compliance (5 points): Secondary hand sanitation is required for items that may be "ready-to-eat"
(e.g., herbs, stone fruit, tomatoes, citrus, edible flowers, etc.). Secondary hand sanitation (hand dips, gels
or sprays) does not replace hand washing requirements (lack surfactant qualities). Secondary hand
sanitation stations should be unscented/non-perfumed, have 60% to 95% ethanol or isopropanol
(benzalkonium chloride is also acceptable) and conveniently located in traffic zones but should not be
obstructive. Hand dips (if used) should contain a USDA approved food grade sanitizer at a determined
concentration. Refer to hand sanitizer manufacturer label for dilutions. Hand dips should be regularly
monitored (recorded anti-microbial strength checks) to ensure their effectiveness with corrective actions
recorded (e.g. dip solution replenishment and anti-microbial additions). Hand gel and spray stations
should be well stocked with a sanitizer approved for direct hand to food contact and regularly monitored
(recorded checks) to ensure availability with corrective actions recorded (e.g. pack replenishment); use of
a refill alert type dispenser is ideal practice. The auditor should check that gel pack type stations are
stocked and have the auditee check the strength of anti-microbial chemicals in hand dips while touring
the facility.

http://www.qualityassurancemag.com/qa0612-proper-hand-sanitation-practices.aspx
https://www.cdc.gov/handwashing/index.html
https://nelsonjameson.com/learn/sanitation-maintenance/hand-hygiene/
https://www.fda.gov/food/guidanceregulation/retailfoodprotection/industryandregulatoryassistanceandtrain
ingresources/ucm113827.htm

Minor deficiency (3 points) if:
· Single/isolated instance(s) of secondary hand sanitation stations not in place or being empty.
· Single/isolated instance(s) of hand dips containing under-strength solutions.
· Single/isolated instance of dispensers not properly located (e.g., too close to the growing area, not

     conveniently located).

Major deficiency (1 point) if:
· Numerous instances of secondary hand sanitation stations not in place or being empty.
· Numerous instances of hand dips containing under-strength solutions.
· Numerous instances of dispensers not properly located (e.g., too close to the growing area, not

     conveniently located).
· Use of hand gel or spray sanitizer that is not approved for direct hand to food contact (e.g., USDA

     approved or national equivalent).

Non-compliance (0 points) if:
· There are no secondary hand sanitation stations where needed or all are empty.
· All hand dips checked found containing under-strength solutions.

3.08.07: Are foot baths, foamers or dry powdered sanitizing stations provided at entrances to
growing areas (where appropriate), and are the stations maintained properly?
Total compliance (3 points): Foot (boot) stations (foot dip mats, baths, sprays) should be located in areas
when crossing into a "clean" zone from an area of potential contamination (e.g., from outside into the

PGFS-R-063                                    Page 47 of 90  October 8, 2021
©2021 Primus Group, Inc. All rights reserved                 Rev. 1

growing area, from growing areas into storage areas, from bathrooms into growing areas, etc.) for some
crops (e.g., mushrooms, aeroponics). Foot dips should contain a food grade sanitizer at a determined
concentration. Refer to sanitizer manufacturer label for dilutions. Foot dips should be regularly monitored
for volume and concentration (recorded anti-microbial strength checks) and the dip solution regularly
changed to ensure their effectiveness with corrective actions recorded (e.g. dip solution replenishment
and anti-microbial additions). Dry products should be EPA registered and applied as per the label
instructions (label dosage directions should be followed for EPA registered floor sanitizers) and regular
renewal should be monitored. The auditor should have the auditee check the strength of anti-microbial
chemicals while touring the facility. This question should be scored based on auditor discretion,
considering the risk of the products/processes. N/A where there are no foot baths, foamers, or dry
powdered sanitizing stations when it is not a requirement for the operation.

http://www.foodsafetymagazine.com/magazine-archive1/december-2004january-2005/the-dos-and-donts-
of-food-plant-personal-hygiene-practices/
http://www.foodsafetymagazine.com/magazine-archive1/augustseptember-2011/sanitizers-and-
disinfectants-the-chemicals-of-prevention/
https://www.qualityassurancemag.com/article/qa0213-doorway-sanitizers-use/
21 CFR 178.1010: https://www.accessdata.fda.gov/scripts/cdrh/cfdocs/cfcfr/CFRSearch.cfm?fr=178.1010

Minor deficiency (2 points) if:
· Single/isolated instance(s) of foot dips not in place.
· Single/isolated instance(s) of the under-strength foot dips or volume not maintained.
· Single/isolated instance(s) of the workers not using the foot dips.

Major deficiency (1 point) if:
· Numerous instances of foot dips not in place.
· Numerous instances of the under-strength foot dips or volume not maintained.
· Numerous instance(s) of the workers not using the foot dip.

Non-compliance (0 points) if:
· No foot dip stations where needed.
· All foot dips checked being found to contain under strength solutions or volume not maintained.
· All workers avoiding using the foot dips.

3.08.08: Are workers' fingernails clean, short and free of nail polish?
Total compliance (5 points): Fingernails can harbor dirt and debris and can be a source of cross
contamination. Therefore, nails should be clean and short to reduce the risk of cross contamination.
Fingernail polish and false nails should not be worn, even when gloves are worn. Use of fingernail
brushes might assist in nail cleaning, however care should be taken to ensure that these brushes are kept
clean and regularly replaced or they might they become a cross contamination vector.

Potentially useful website:
Food Code (section 2-302.11) https://www.fda.gov/food/fda-food-code/food-code-2017

Minor deficiency (3 points) if:

· Single/isolated instance(s) of dirty and/or long fingernails.
· Single/isolated instance(s) of fingernail polish being worn.
· Single/isolated instance(s) of false fingernails being worn.

Major deficiency (1 point) if:

· Numerous instances of dirty and/or long fingernails.
· Numerous instances of fingernail polish being worn.
· Numerous instances of false fingernails being worn.

PGFS-R-063                                    Page 48 of 90  October 8, 2021
©2021 Primus Group, Inc. All rights reserved                 Rev. 1

Non-compliance (0 points) if:

· Widespread failure to ensure that fingernails are short and clean.
· Widespread failure to ensure that fingernail polish and/or false fingernails are not worn.

3.08.09: Are workers who are working directly or indirectly with food, free from signs of boils,
sores, open wounds and are not exhibiting signs of foodborne illness?
Total compliance (10 points): Workers who have exposed boils, sores, exposed infected wounds,
foodborne illness or any other source of abnormal microbial contamination should not be allowed to work
in contact with the product, packaging or food contact surfaces. Workers should be requested to notify
their supervisors if they have any concerning symptoms. All bandages should be covered with a non-
porous covering such as non-latex or vinyl gloves.

Minor deficiency (7 points) if:

· A single instance of a worker with exposed boils, sores, exposed infected wounds, foodborne illness

     or any other source of abnormal microbial contamination. There is not a threat of product or
     packaging contamination.

Major deficiency (3 points) if:
· More than one instance of workers with exposed boils, sores, exposed infected wounds, foodborne

     illness or any other source of abnormal microbial contamination. There is not a threat of product or
     packaging contamination.

Non-compliance (0 points) if:
· One or more workers are observed working in contact with food, food contact surfaces or packaging

     that has or have exposed boils, sores, infected wounds, showing signs of food borne illness or any
     other source of abnormal microbial contamination that is a hazard.
· The auditor should consider whether this is adulteration and whether to apply 3.05.10 and
     score an automatic failure.

3.08.10: Is jewelry confined to a plain wedding band and watches, studs, false eyelashes, etc., are
not worn?
Total compliance (5 points): Workers are not observed wearing jewelry (including earrings, ear gauges,
necklaces, bracelets, rings with stones, rings or studs in nose, lip and eyebrow, watches) in the growing
area. Plain wedding bands are the only exception. Other examples of foreign items that may be a source
of foreign material contamination include studs, false eye lashes, eye lash extensions, etc.

Minor deficiency (3 points) if:
· Single/isolated instance(s) of a worker observed wearing jewelry or watches or any other personal

     item that may be a foreign contaminant.

Major deficiency (1 point) if:
· Numerous instances of workers observed wearing jewelry or watches or any other personal item that

     may be a foreign contaminant.

Non-compliance (0 points) if:
· Majority of workers wearing jewelry or watches or any other personal item that may be a foreign

     contaminant i.e. jewelry policy does not exist and/or jewelry policy exists but is not being
     implemented.

3.08.11: Are all workers wearing protective outer garments suitable for the operation (e.g.
appropriate clean clothes, smocks, aprons, sleeves and non-latex gloves)?
Total compliance (5 points): If the operation has taken a decision to establish an outer garment policy
based on risks this should consider the following: customer requirements, national and local legal
requirements, potential cross contamination and foreign material risks, etc. Outer garments include where
applicable: smocks, aprons, sleeves, gloves, etc. Suitable clothing is required for workers handling

PGFS-R-063                                    Page 49 of 90  October 8, 2021
©2021 Primus Group, Inc. All rights reserved                 Rev. 1

products that are potentially ready-to-eat (e.g., tomatoes, leafy greens, etc.). Items should be laundered
in-house or by contract laundering agency. Individual workers should not take protective outer garments
home for cleaning. Where items are laundered in-house the auditee should have documented SOP and
GAP rules about how these garments are cleaned. Glove policy should be clear to workers ­ auditors will
establish policy before making scoring decisions and note this policy for the audit report. Gloves are not
allowed to replace hand-washing requirements. Gloves should be changed after break periods, using
toilet facilities, any activity other than handling of food items or when gloves are soiled, torn or otherwise
contaminated. If re-useable gloves are used, then they should be made of material that can be readily
cleaned and sanitized, clean gloves should be issued at least daily and as needed throughout the day
and stored properly in-between uses. Gloves should not be taken home for cleaning. Where gloves are
used they should be non-latex (e.g. vinyl, nitrile, etc.). This includes gloves in first-aid kits.
Where dedicated protective clothing is not required/worn, it must be clear that outer street clothes are
clean and not a potential source of contamination. Workers should not wear personal clothes with
sequins, pom-poms, fur, etc. No sleeveless tops without an over garment.

Minor deficiency (3 points) if:
· Single/isolated instance(s) of outer garments or gloves being taken home.
· Single/isolated instance(s) of gloves not being replaced when contaminated.
· Single/isolated instance(s) of protective garments not being worn where required.
· Single/isolated instance(s) of outer clothing not clean or being a potential source of contamination.

Major deficiency (1 point) if:
· Numerous instances of outer garments or gloves being taken home.
· Numerous instances of gloves not being replaced when contaminated.
· Numerous instances of protective garments not being worn where required.
· Numerous instance(s) of outer clothing not clean or being a potential source of contamination.

Non-compliance (0 points) if: (one of the following is found)
· An outer garment policy is not established.
· Widespread failure to replace gloves when contaminated.
· Widespread failure to wear protective garments where required.
· Widespread failure to wear clean outer clothing or of clothing being a potential source of

     contamination.
· Widespread non-compliance to the above and/or company policy.

3.08.11a: Do workers remove protective outer garments (e.g., smocks, aprons, sleeves, and
gloves) when on break, before using the toilets and when going home at the end of their shift?
Total compliance (5 points): When worn, protective clothing (e.g., aprons, smocks, sleeves and gloves)
are to be removed when workers leave the work area (e.g., when they go to the toilet facility, lunchroom,
outside, smoking breaks, etc.). Workers cannot smoke, eat, go outside the building or use the restroom
while wearing these garments.

Minor deficiency (3 points) if:
· Single/isolated instance(s) are observed of non-compliance to the above

Major deficiency (1 point) if:
· Numerous instances are observed of non-compliance to the above

Non-compliance (0 points) if:
· Widespread non-compliance to the above

3.08.11b: Is there a designated area for workers to leave protective outer garments (e.g., smocks,
aprons, sleeves, and gloves) when on break and before using the toilets?
Total compliance (5 points): There should be a designated area for workers to leave protective clothing
when they are worn (e.g., aprons, smocks, sleeves and gloves). Workers are observed using the

PGFS-R-063                                    Page 50 of 90  October 8, 2021
©2021 Primus Group, Inc. All rights reserved                 Rev. 1

designated area when they leave the work area (e.g., when they go to the toilet facility, lunchroom,
outside, etc.). Workers should not leave protective outer garments on floors, work tables, equipment or
packaging materials. Designated area should not be within the toilet facilities, inside the break room, next
to worker clothing or any other area that might be a risk to the outer garments. Garments should not be
left touching product, packaging or food contact surfaces.

Minor deficiency (3 points) if:
· Single/isolated instance(s) are observed of non-compliance to the above

Major deficiency (1 point) if:
· Numerous instances are observed of non-compliance to the above

Non-compliance (0 points) if:
· There is not a designated area for workers to leave aprons, sleeves and gloves when on a break.
· There is a designated area; however, no workers use this area.
· Any of the items are observed being placed on the floor.
· Widespread non-compliance to the above.

3.08.12: Are worker personal items being stored appropriately (i.e. not in the growing areas or
material storage areas)?
Total compliance (5 points): Workers should have a designated area for storing personal items such as
coats, shoes, purses, medication, phones, etc. Areas set aside for workers' personal items should be far
enough away from stored growing area(s) and material storage area(s) to prevent contamination and
avoid food defense risks. Lockers or cubbies are ideal if maintained properly, mounted off the floor and
with sloping tops and located outside growing and storage areas. Wire, see-through lockers are ideal.

Minor deficiency (3 points) if:
· Single or isolated instance(s) of personal belongings, personal food, etc. being found in growing or

     storage areas.

Major deficiency (1 point) if:
· Numerous instances of personal belongings, personal food, etc. being found in growing or storage

     areas.

Non-compliance (0 points) if:
· Fundamental failure to prevent personal belongings, personal food, etc. being taken into the growing

     area.

3.08.13: Is smoking, eating, chewing and drinking confined to designated areas, and spitting is
prohibited in all areas?
Total compliance (5 points): Smoking, chewing tobacco, chewing gum, drinking and eating is permitted in
designated areas that are away from growing and storage areas. Spitting should be prohibited in all
areas. Smoking should not be permitted in eating and drinking areas.

21 CFR Part 110.10 http://www.accessdata.fda.gov/scripts/cdrh/cfdocs/cfcfr/CFRSearch.cfm?fr=110.10
29 CFR Part 1910.41
http://www.osha.gov/pls/oshaweb/owadisp.show_document?p_table=STANDARDS&p_id=9790
21 CFR Part 117.10
https://www.accessdata.fda.gov/scripts/cdrh/cfdocs/cfCFR/CFRSearch.cfm?fr=117.10
21 CFP Part 112.32
https://www.accessdata.fda.gov/scripts/cdrh/cfdocs/cfCFR/CFRSearch.cfm?fr=112.32

Minor deficiency (3 points) if:

PGFS-R-063                                    Page 51 of 90  October 8, 2021
©2021 Primus Group, Inc. All rights reserved                 Rev. 1

· Single/isolated instance(s) are observed of non-compliance to the above (includes evidence of
     smoking, eating, spitting, chewing gum, improper storage of break time food or drinking containers in
     interior refuse containers).

· Single/isolated instance(s) of designated area not meeting appropriate GAP/GMP standards.

Major deficiency (1 point) if:
· Numerous instances are observed of non-compliance to the above (includes evidence of smoking,

     eating, spitting, chewing gum, improper storage of break time food or drinking containers in interior
     refuse containers).
· No designated smoking area (unless the site has a non-smoking policy).
· Numerous instances of designated area not meeting appropriate GAP/GMP standards.

Non-compliance (0 points) if:
· Widespread consumption of food and beverages outside of designated areas.
· Widespread evidence of smoking outside the designated area.
· Widespread evidence of using chewing tobacco in growing and storage areas.
· Designated area lacks access to a hand wash station.
· Widespread non-compliance to the above criteria.

3.08.14: Is fresh potable drinking water readily accessible to workers?
Total compliance (10 points): Fresh potable water meeting the quality standards for drinking water should
be provided and placed in locations readily accessible to all workers on-site to prevent dehydration. The
term "potable" meaning that the water is of drinking water quality (e.g., the EPA Drinking Water Standard
or equivalent). Auditors should verbally verify the source of the water at the time of the audit. If water
containers are used, they should be maintained in a clean condition, free from residues and
contamination to ensure workers are not adversely affected by contaminated water from unclean
containers. If there is evidence (i.e. visual observation or documentation) the water is coming from a
questionable source, the auditor should review water quality test results.

Minor deficiency (7 points) if:
· Single/isolated instance(s) of an unclean water container being used.

Major deficiency (3 points) if:
· Numerous instances of an unclean water containers being used.

Non-compliance (0 points) if:
· There is no water provided.
· The water provided is not potable.

3.08.14a: Are single use cups provided (unless a drinking fountain is used) and made available
near the drinking water?
Total compliance (5 points): Single use cups should be provided so that cross contamination issues are
avoided from person to person. Examples include single use cups, drinking fountains, etc. Common
drinking cups and other common utensils are prohibited.
Minor deficiency (3 points) if:
· Single/isolated instance(s) of single-use cups missing from one of the water containers.

Major deficiency (1 point) if:
· Numerous instances of single-use cups missing from the water containers.
· A drinking fountain is being used but is not in a sanitary condition.

Non-compliance (0 points) if:
· Single-use cups are not provided for the water containers.

3.08.15: Are first aid kits adequately stocked and readily available?

PGFS-R-063                                    Page 52 of 90  October 8, 2021
©2021 Primus Group, Inc. All rights reserved                 Rev. 1

Total compliance (5 points): First aid kit(s) should be adequately supplied to reflect the kinds of injuries
that occur (including any chemicals stored on-site) and should be stored in an area where they are readily
available for emergency access. Date-coded materials should be within dates of expiration. Bandages
used should ideally be waterproof and blue in color for easy visual detection. Gloves should be worn over
all band aids on hands. Auditors should verify by checking the first-aid kit(s).

Minor deficiency (3 points) if:
· Single/isolated instance(s) of first aid kit(s) not having adequate supplies, supplies out-of-date or kit

     not readily accessible.

Major deficiency (1 point) if:
· Numerous instances of first aid kit(s) not having adequate supplies, supplies out-of-date or kit not

     readily accessible.

Non-compliance (0 points) if:
· Fundamental failure to provide first aid kit(s) with adequate supplies, supplies out-of-date or kit not

     readily accessible.

3.08.16: Are there adequate trash cans placed in suitable locations?
Total compliance (5 points): There should be adequate measures for trash disposal so that the growing
and storage areas are not contaminated. Containers (e.g. dumpsters, cans) should be available and
placed in suitable locations for the disposal of waste and trash, e.g., near handwash stations. All
dumpsters and garbage receptacles should have a cover and be kept covered to prevent the attraction of
insects, rodents and other pests. N/A option available if there is no work taking place at the time of the
audit.

Minor deficiency (3 points) if:
· Single/isolated instance of containers not available and/or being maintained to protect against

     potential contamination of the crop.

Major deficiency (1 point) if:
· Numerous instances of containers not available and/or being maintained to protect against potential

     contamination of the crop.

Non-compliance (0 points) if:
· Fundamental failure to provide adequate trash disposal.
· Fundamental failure to maintain containers to protect against potential contamination of the crop.

Agronomic Inputs

3.09.01: Is human sewage sludge (biosolids) used as an input?
Total points 0: Information gathering question. Human sewage sludge (biosolids), which are by-products
of wastewater treatment, should not to be used in the growing cycle for indoor growing operations, and
also where specifically prohibited under best management practices (e.g., LGMA, T-GAPs). The use of
untreated biosolids is prohibited.
https://toxics.usgs.gov/regional/emc/municipal_biosolids.html

3.09.01a: Is fertilizer being used where the country regulations/guidelines ban the use of such
materials (e.g., Californian Leafy Green Commodity Specific Guidelines)? ANY DOWN SCORE IN
THIS QUESTION RESULTS IN AN AUTOMATIC FAILURE OF THE AUDIT.
Total compliance (15 points): Some commodity specific guidelines have rules regarding the use of
specific fertilizer types, e.g. Californian Leafy Green Commodity Specific Guidelines bans the use of
biosolids and untreated animal manure.

Automatic Failure (0 points) if:

PGFS-R-063                                    Page 53 of 90  October 8, 2021
©2021 Primus Group, Inc. All rights reserved                 Rev. 1

· There is a single incidence of fertilizer being used where the country regulations/guidelines
     ban their use.

3.09.01b: Are there fertilizer use records available for each growing area, including application
records?
Total compliance (15 points): Records should be legible and at least detail date of application, type of
fertilizer, amount, method of application (drip, bulk, etc.), where it was applied and operator name. There
should be sufficient identification information in the records that would make it possible to trace an
application back to the site if needed. There should be an interval between application and harvest of at
least 45 days for non-synthetic crop treatments and compost, and an interval of at least 120 days (but
ideally 9 months) for untreated animal manure. A shorter interval is possible if the fertilizer has been
through a physical/chemical/biological process to inactivate human pathogens and the auditee has
validation study documentation that shows that the material is safe. Validation studies must be applicable
to the situation at hand and care should be taken not to over extrapolate. There should be confirmation
that monitoring records of the validation study's key requirements are being kept and that these
monitoring records are being verified. The applications should be incorporated into the soil prior to
planting or bud burst for tree crops.

Minor deficiency (10 points) if:
· Single/isolated instance(s) of errors or omissions in the records.

Major deficiency (5 points) if:
· Numerous instances of errors or omissions in the records.

Non-compliance (0 points) if:
· Fundamental failure to maintain records.
· No records are available.
· The interval between application and harvest is not being respected, and there is no validation study

     to verify application timelines.
· Any incident of direct product contamination constitutes as a health hazard and is viewed as

     adulteration. Revert to Q 3.05.10

3.09.01c: Are there Certificate(s) of Analysis (CoA), specifications, product label or other
documents available for review provided by the supplier stating the components of the material?
Total compliance (10 points): Certificate(s) of Analysis (CoA), letters of guarantee or other formal
documentation from the fertilizer manufacturer(s) or supplier(s) should be current and state any inert or
active ingredient substances used as "fillers" (e.g., clay pellets, granular limestone). Concerns are for
heavy metals that may affect human health (e.g. Arsenic (As), Cadmium (Cd), Chromium (Cr), Copper
(Cu), Lead (Pb), Mercury (Hg), Molybdenum (Mo), Nickel (Ni), Selenium (Se), Zinc (Zn). See Table 2-1
Ceiling Concentrations for Pollutants, EPA Guide to 40 CFR Part 503 Rule. There should be sufficient
identification information that would make it possible to trace back to the source if needed, therefore, only
approved suppliers should be used limited to those firms demonstrating consistent compliance with
prevailing national/local standards and guidelines.
https://www.epa.gov/biosolids/plain-english-guide-epa-part-503-biosolids-rule
https://apps1.cdfa.ca.gov/fertilizerproducts/
http://library.state.or.us/repository/2007/200701251422434/index.pdf
https://agr.wa.gov/departments/pesticides-and-fertilizers/fertilizers/product-database

Minor deficiency (7 points) if:
· Documentation is available, but there is no reference to the inert material that is used.

Major deficiency (3 points) if:
· The documentation demonstrates that heavy metals that can affect human health are used as fillers

     without specific concentration information indicating standards.

PGFS-R-063                                    Page 54 of 90  October 8, 2021
©2021 Primus Group, Inc. All rights reserved                                             Rev. 1

Non-compliance (0 points) if:
· There is no documentation available detailing the components of the material.
· Documentation is provided, but is not in sufficient detail to be able to trace back to the source.

3.09.01d: Are there Certificate(s) of Analysis (CoA) from the supplier(s) that cover pathogen
testing (plus any other legally/best practice required testing) and does the grower have relevant
letters of guarantee regarding supplier SOPs and logs?
Total compliance (15 points): There should be evidence that each laboratory test result (certificate of
analysis) provided is traceable to each material used. (e.g., CoA is traced to each lot of crop treatment
used). Tests should include microbiological analyses. As minimum, for non-synthetic crop treatments
(e.g., compost teas, fish emulsions, fish meal, blood meal, "bio fertilizers") and for animal based compost
microbial testing should include Salmonella spp., E. coli O157:H7, and Listeria monocytogenes at
Negative or <DL and include fecal coliforms/gram at < 1000 MPN of total solids and any other pathogens
appropriate for the source of material using approved sampling and testing methods (e.g., AOAC and an
accredited laboratory). All local and national legislation should also be followed.
Where legally allowed, a reduced sampling rate is possible if the material is produced by the auditee (e.g.
mushroom growing operations with in-house compost production) and has been through a validated
physical/chemical/biological process to inactivate human pathogens (Salmonella spp., E. coli O157:H7,
Listeria monocytogenes) and show fecal coliforms/gram <1000 MPN. The auditee has the test analyses
that show that the material is safe and proper process control records (e.g., time/temperature records and
calibration records, such as, temperature probe) are maintained and available during the audit. Validation
studies used must be applicable to the situation at hand and care should be taken not to over extrapolate.
The grower should have proof that compost suppliers have cross contamination SOPs and
temperature/turning logs.

Sampling Plan Options below may be used to determine the definition of lots produced. There should be
an indication from the supplier/producer of how lots are determined (i.e. from the information here or from
another method). The sampling plans below are taken from current regulations in the state of California
(related to bio-solids) and recognized manure-based compost guidelines included under the Leafy
Greens Marketing Agreement.

Option 1

Amount of Biosolids Compost Feedstock

Metric Tons per 365-day Period                               Frequency

Greater than zero but annually fewer than 290                Annually

Equal to or greater than 290 but fewer than 1,500            Quarterly

Equal to or greater than 1,500 but fewer than 15,000         Bimonthly (Every 2 months)

Equal to or greater than 15,000                              Monthly

Source: State of California Regulations: Title 14, Natural Resources--Division 7, CIWMB

Chapter 3.1. Composting Operations Regulatory Requirements

Option 2
Testing Frequency: Each lot (post Phase II, before use with mushroom production). A lot is defined as
a unit of production equal to or less than 5,000 cubic yards (3,823 cubic meters)
Source: Adapted from Composted Soil Amendments (containing animal manure or animal products)
included in the LGMA Commodity Specific Food Safety Guidelines for the Production and Harvest of
Lettuce and Leafy Greens".
Rationale: A "lot" of compost may vary depending upon the process implemented. The objective of the
audit scheme is to provide a means of verifying the heat treatments systems applied to compost has
been effective.

Reference:
21 CFR Part 112 Subpart F- Biological Soil Amendments of Animal Origin and Human Waste, for details
on treatment processes and microbial testing standards.

PGFS-R-063                                    Page 55 of 90                              October 8, 2021
©2021 Primus Group, Inc. All rights reserved                 Rev. 1

https://www.accessdata.fda.gov/scripts/cdrh/cfdocs/cfCFR/CFRSearch.cfm?CFRPart=112&showFR=1&s
ubpartNode=21:2.0.1.1.12.6
California state regulations for compost (CCR Title 14 - Chapter 3.1 - Article 7;
https://govt.westlaw.com/calregs/Document/I978C116BD2DF4472ACEADBAE443C29D1?contextData=
%28sc.Default%29&transitionType=Default
NOP 5021 Guidance Compost and Vermicompost in Organic Crop Production;
https://www.ams.usda.gov/sites/default/files/media/5021.pdf

Minor deficiency (10 points) if:
· Single/isolated instance(s) of a missing test on an individual lot used.

Major deficiency (5 points) if:
· Numerous instances of missing tests on an individual lot used.
· Single/isolated instance(s) of the same missing test from multiple lots used.

Non-compliance (0 points) if:
· There are no CoAs for the material being used.
· Fundamental failure to provide evidence for required tests performed on the lots used.

3.09.01e: Are there Certificate(s) of Analysis (CoA), letters of guarantee or other documents from
the supplier(s) that cover heavy metal testing?
Total compliance (10 points): Certificate(s) of Analysis (CoA), letters of guarantee or some other
documents from the compost supplier(s) that covers heavy metal testing should be available. Concerns
are for heavy metals that may affect human health (e.g. Arsenic (As), Cadmium (Cd), Chromium (Cr),
Copper (Cu), Lead (Pb), Mercury (Hg), Molybdenum (Mo), Nickel (Ni), Selenium (Se), Zinc (Zn). See
Table 2-1 Ceiling Concentrations for Pollutants, EPA Guide to 40 CFR Part 503 Rule. All local and
national legislation should also be followed.
https://www.epa.gov/biosolids/plain-english-guide-epa-part-503-biosolids-rule
https://www.govinfo.gov/content/pkg/CFR-2018-title40-vol32/xml/CFR-2018-title40-vol32-
part503.xml#seqnum503.13
https://www.planetnatural.com/composting-101/compost-concerns/heavy-metals/

Minor deficiency (7 points) if:
· Single/isolated instance(s) of a missing test on an individual lot used.

Major deficiency (3 points) if:
· Numerous instances of missing tests on an individual lot used.
· Single/isolated instance(s) of the same missing test from multiple lots used.

Non-compliance (0 points) if:
· There are no CoAs or other documentation available for the material being used.
· Failure to provide evidence for required tests performed on the lots used.

3.09.02: Is compost produced from animal derived materials used as an input?
Total points 0: Information gathering question. This question is specifically targeting compost produced
from raw animal manures, as opposed to green waste.

3.09.02a: Is fertilizer being used where the country regulations/guidelines ban the use of such
materials (e.g., Californian Leafy Green Commodity Specific Guidelines)? ANY DOWN SCORE IN
THIS QUESTION RESULTS IN AN AUTOMATIC FAILURE OF THE AUDIT.
Total compliance (15 points): Some commodity specific guidelines have rules regarding the use of
specific fertilizer types, e.g. Californian Leafy Green Commodity Specific Guidelines bans the use of
biosolids and untreated animal manure.

Automatic Failure (0 points) if:

PGFS-R-063                                    Page 56 of 90  October 8, 2021
©2021 Primus Group, Inc. All rights reserved                 Rev. 1

· There is a single incidence of fertilizer being used where the country regulations/guidelines
     ban their use.

3.09.02b: Are there fertilizer use records available for each growing area, including application
records?
Total compliance (15 points): Records should be legible and at least detail the date of application, type of
fertilizer, amount, method of application (drip, bulk, etc.), where it was applied and operator name. There
should be sufficient identification information in the records that would make it possible to trace an
application back to the site if needed. There should be an interval between application and harvest of at
least 45 days for non-synthetic crop treatments and compost, and an interval of at least 120 days (but
ideally 9 months) for untreated animal manure. A shorter interval is possible if the fertilizer has been
through a physical/chemical/biological process to inactivate human pathogens and the auditee has
validation study documentation that shows that the material is safe. Validation studies must be applicable
to the situation at hand and care should be taken not to over extrapolate. There should be confirmation
that monitoring records of the validation study's key requirements are being kept and that these
monitoring records are being verified. The applications should be incorporated into the soil prior to
planting or bud burst for tree crops.

Minor deficiency (10 points) if:
· Single/isolated instance(s) of errors or omissions in the records.

Major deficiency (5 points) if:
· Numerous instances of errors or omissions in the records.

Non-compliance (0 points) if:
· Fundamental failure to maintain records.
· No records are available.
· The interval between application and harvest is not being respected, and there is no validation study

     to verify application timelines.
· Any incident of direct product contamination constitutes as a health hazard and is viewed as

     adulteration. Revert to Q 3.05.10.

3.09.02c: Are there Certificate(s) of Analysis (CoA), specifications, product label or other
documents available for review provided by the supplier stating the components of the material?
Total compliance (10 points): Certificate(s) of Analysis (CoA), letters of guarantee or other formal
documentation from the fertilizer manufacturer's or supplier(s) should be current and state any inert or
active ingredient substances used as "fillers" (e.g. Arsenic (As), Cadmium (Cd), Chromium (Cr), Copper
(Cu), Lead (Pb), Mercury (Hg), Molybdenum (Mo), Nickel (Ni), Selenium (Se), Zinc (Zn). See Table 2-1
Ceiling Concentrations for Pollutants, EPA Guide to 40 CFR Part 503 Rule. There should be sufficient
identification information that would make it possible to trace back to the source if needed, therefore, only
approved suppliers should be used limited to those firms demonstrating consistent compliance with
prevailing national/local standards and guidelines.

https://apps1.cdfa.ca.gov/fertilizerproducts/
http://library.state.or.us/repository/2007/200701251422434/index.pdf
https://agr.wa.gov/departments/pesticides-and-fertilizers/fertilizers/product-database
https://cms.agr.wa.gov/WSDAKentico/Documents/Pubs/707-
382HeavyMetalsTestRequirements.pdf?/707-382HeavyMetalsTestRequirements

Minor deficiency (7 points) if:
· Documentation is available, but there is no reference to the inert material that is used.

Major deficiency (3 points) if:
· The documentation demonstrates that heavy metals that can affect human health are used as fillers

     without specific concentration information indicating standards.

PGFS-R-063                                    Page 57 of 90  October 8, 2021
©2021 Primus Group, Inc. All rights reserved                                             Rev. 1

Non-compliance (0 points) if:
· There is no documentation available detailing the components of the material.
· Documentation is provided but is not in sufficient detail to be able to trace back to the source.

3.09.02d: Are there Certificate(s) of Analysis (CoA) from the supplier(s) that cover pathogen
testing (plus any other legally/best practice required testing) and does the grower have relevant
letters of guarantee regarding supplier SOPs and logs?
Total compliance (15 points): There should be evidence that each laboratory test result (certificate of
analysis) provided is traceable to each material used. (e.g., CoA is traced to each lot of crop treatment
used). Tests should include microbiological analyses. As minimum, for non-synthetic crop treatments
(e.g., compost teas, fish emulsions, fish meal, blood meal, "bio fertilizers") and for animal based compost
microbial testing should include Salmonella spp., E. coli O157:H7, and Listeria monocytogenes at
Negative or <DL and include fecal coliforms/gram at < 1000 MPN of total solids and any other pathogens
appropriate for the source of material using approved sampling and testing methods (e.g., AOAC and an
accredited laboratory). All local and national legislation should also be followed.
Where legally allowed, a reduced sampling rate is possible if the material is produced by the auditee (e.g.
mushroom growing operations with in-house compost production) and has been through a validated
physical/chemical/biological process to inactivate human pathogens (Salmonella spp., E. coli O157:H7,
Listeria monocytogenes) and show fecal coliforms/gram <1000 MPN. The auditee has the test analyses
that show that the material is safe and proper process control records (e.g., time/temperature records and
calibration records, such as, temperature probe) are maintained and available during the audit. Validation
studies used must be applicable to the situation at hand and care should be taken not to over extrapolate.
The grower should have proof that compost suppliers have cross contamination SOPs and
temperature/turning logs.

Sampling Plan Options below may be used to determine the definition of lots produced. There should be
an indication from the supplier/producer of how lots are determined (i.e. from the information here or from
another method). The sampling plans below are taken from current regulations in the state of California
(related to bio-solids) and recognized manure-based compost guidelines included under the Leafy
Greens Marketing Agreement.

Option 1

Amount of Biosolids Compost Feedstock

Metric Tons per 365-day Period                               Frequency

Greater than zero but annually fewer than 290                Annually

Equal to or greater than 290 but fewer than 1,500            Quarterly

Equal to or greater than 1,500 but fewer than 15,000         Bimonthly (Every 2 months)

Equal to or greater than 15,000                              Monthly

Source: State of California Regulations: Title 14, Natural Resources--Division 7, CIWMB

Chapter 3.1. Composting Operations Regulatory Requirements

Option 2
Testing Frequency: Each lot (post Phase II, before use with mushroom production). A lot is defined as
a unit of production equal to or less than 5,000 cubic yards (3,823 cubic meters)
Source: Adapted from Composted Soil Amendments (containing animal manure or animal products)
included in the LGMA Commodity Specific Food Safety Guidelines for the Production and Harvest of
Lettuce and Leafy Greens".
Rationale: A "lot" of compost may vary depending upon the process implemented. The objective of the
audit scheme is to provide a means of verifying the heat treatments systems applied to compost has
been effective.

Reference:
21 CFR Part 112 Subpart F- Biological Soil Amendments of Animal Origin and Human Waste, for details
on treatment processes and microbial testing standards.

PGFS-R-063                                    Page 58 of 90                              October 8, 2021
©2021 Primus Group, Inc. All rights reserved                 Rev. 1

https://www.accessdata.fda.gov/scripts/cdrh/cfdocs/cfCFR/CFRSearch.cfm?CFRPart=112&showFR=1&s
ubpartNode=21:2.0.1.1.12.6
California state regulations for compost (CCR Title 14 - Chapter 3.1 - Article 7;
https://govt.westlaw.com/calregs/Document/I978C116BD2DF4472ACEADBAE443C29D1?contextData=
%28sc.Default%29&transitionType=Default
NOP 5021 Guidance Compost and Vermicompost in Organic Crop Production;
https://www.ams.usda.gov/sites/default/files/media/5021.pdf

Minor deficiency (10 points) if:
· Single/isolated instance(s) of a missing test on an individual lot used.

Major deficiency (5 points) if:
· Numerous instances of missing tests on an individual lot used.
· Single/isolated instance(s) of the same missing test from multiple lots used.

Non-compliance (0 points) if:
· There are no CoAs for the material being used.
· Fundamental failure to provide evidence for required tests performed on the lots used.

3.09.02e: Are there Certificate(s) of Analysis (CoA), letters of guarantee or other documents from
the supplier(s) that cover heavy metal testing?
Total compliance (10 points): Certificate(s) of Analysis (CoA), letters of guarantee or some other
documents from the supplier(s) that covers heavy metal testing should be available. Concerns are for
heavy metals that may affect human health (e.g. Arsenic (As), Cadmium (Cd), Chromium (Cr), Copper
(Cu), Lead (Pb), Mercury (Hg), Molybdenum (Mo), Nickel (Ni), Selenium (Se), Zinc (Zn)). All local and
national legislation should also be followed.
http://www.calrecycle.ca.gov/laws/Regulations/Title14/ch31a5.htm

Minor deficiency (7 points) if:
· Single/isolated instance(s) of a missing test on an individual lot used.

Major deficiency (3 points) if:
· Numerous instances of missing tests on an individual lot used.
· Single/isolated instance(s) of the same missing test from multiple lots used.

Non-compliance (0 points) if:
· There are no CoAs or other documentation available for the material being used.
· Fundamental failure to provide evidence for required tests performed on the lots used.

3.09.03: Is untreated animal manure used as an input (e.g. raw manure &/or uncomposted,
incompletely composted animal manure, green waste, non-thermally treated animal manure)?
Total compliance (0 points): Information gathering question. Untreated animal manure refers to manure
that is raw and has not gone through a treatment process. Examples include raw manure and/or
uncomposted, incompletely composted animal manure and/or green waste or non-thermally treated
animal manure. Untreated animal manure should not be used in indoor growing operations or where
prohibited under best management practices.

Automatic Failure (0 points) if:
· There is a single incidence of untreated animal manure being used in the growing cycle of

     indoor growing operations or where prohibited under best management practices.

3.09.03a: Is fertilizer being used where the country regulations/guidelines ban the use of such
materials (e.g., Californian Leafy Green Commodity Specific Guidelines)? ANY DOWN SCORE IN
THIS QUESTION RESULTS IN AN AUTOMATIC FAILURE OF THE AUDIT.

PGFS-R-063                                    Page 59 of 90  October 8, 2021
©2021 Primus Group, Inc. All rights reserved                 Rev. 1

Total compliance (15 points): Some commodity specific guidelines have rules regarding use of specific
fertilizer types, e.g. Californian Leafy Green Commodity Specific Guidelines ban the use of biosolids and
untreated animal manure.

Automatic Failure (0 points) if:
· There is a single incidence of fertilizer being used where the country regulations/guidelines

     ban their use.

3.09.03b: Are there fertilizer use records available for each growing area, including application
records?
Total compliance (15 points): Records should be legible and at least detail the date of application, type of
fertilizer, amount, method of application (drip, bulk, etc.), where it was applied and operator name. There
should be sufficient identification information in the records that would make it possible to trace an
application back to the site if needed. There should be an interval between application and harvest of at
least 45 days for non-synthetic crop treatments and compost, and an interval of at least 120 days (but
ideally 9 months) for untreated animal manure. A shorter interval is possible if the fertilizer has been
through a physical/chemical/biological process to inactivate human pathogens and the auditee has
validation study documentation that shows that the material is safe. Validation studies must be applicable
to the situation at hand and care should be taken not to over extrapolate. There should be confirmation
that monitoring records of the validation study's key requirements are being kept and that these
monitoring records are being verified. The applications should be incorporated into the soil prior to
planting or bud burst for tree crops.

Minor deficiency (10 points) if:
· Single/isolated instance(s) of errors or omissions in the records.

Major deficiency (5 points) if:
· Numerous instances of errors or omissions in the records.

Non-compliance (0 points) if:
· Fundamental failure to maintain records.
· No records are available.
· The interval between application and harvest is not being respected, and there is no validation study

     to verify application timelines.
· Any incident of direct product contamination constitutes as a health hazard and is viewed as

     adulteration. Revert to Q 3.05.10.

3.09.03c: Are there Certificate(s) of Analysis (CoA), specifications, product label or other
documents available for review provided by the supplier stating the components of the material?
Total compliance (10 points): Certificate(s) of Analysis (CoA), letters of guarantee or other formal
documentation from the fertilizer manufacturer's or supplier(s) should be current and state any inert or
active ingredient substances used as "fillers" (e.g., clay pellets, granular limestone). Concerns are for
heavy metals that may affect human health (e.g. Arsenic (As), Cadmium (Cd), Chromium (Cr), Copper
(Cu), Lead (Pb), Mercury (Hg), Molybdenum (Mo), Nickel (Ni), Selenium (Se), Zinc (Zn)). See Table 2-1
Ceiling Concentrations for Pollutants, EPA Guide to 40 CFR Part 503 Rule. There should be sufficient
identification information that would make it possible to trace back to the source if needed, therefore, only
approved suppliers should be used limited to those firms demonstrating consistent compliance with
prevailing national/local standards and guidelines.
https://apps1.cdfa.ca.gov/fertilizerproducts/
http://library.state.or.us/repository/2007/200701251422434/index.pdf
https://agr.wa.gov/departments/pesticides-and-fertilizers/fertilizers/product-database
https://cms.agr.wa.gov/WSDAKentico/Documents/Pubs/707-
382HeavyMetalsTestRequirements.pdf?/707-382HeavyMetalsTestRequirements

Minor deficiency (7 points) if:

PGFS-R-063                                    Page 60 of 90  October 8, 2021
©2021 Primus Group, Inc. All rights reserved                 Rev. 1

· Documentation is available, but there is no reference to the inert material that is used.

Major deficiency (3 points) if:
· The documentation demonstrates that heavy metals that can affect human health are used as fillers

     without specific concentration information indicating standards.

Non-compliance (0 points) if:
· There is no documentation available detailing the components of the material.
· Documentation is provided but is not in sufficient detail to be able to trace back to the source.

3.09.03d: Are there Certificate(s) of Analysis (CoA), letters of guarantee or other documents from
the supplier(s) that cover heavy metal testing?
Total compliance (10 points): Certificate(s) of Analysis (CoA), letters of guarantee or some other
documents from the supplier(s) that covers heavy metal testing should be available. Concerns are for
heavy metals that may affect human health (e.g. Arsenic (As), Cadmium (Cd), Chromium (Cr), Copper
(Cu), Lead (Pb), Mercury (Hg), Molybdenum (Mo), Nickel (Ni), Selenium (Se), Zinc (Zn)). See Table 2-1
Ceiling Concentrations for Pollutants, EPA Guide to 40 CFR Part 503 Rule. All local and national
legislation should also be followed.
https://www.epa.gov/sites/production/files/2018-12/documents/plain-english-guide-part503-biosolids-
rule.pdf
https://www.govinfo.gov/content/pkg/CFR-2018-title40-vol32/xml/CFR-2018-title40-vol32-
part503.xml#seqnum503.13
https://www.planetnatural.com/composting-101/compost-concerns/heavy-metals/

Minor deficiency (7 points) if:
· Single/isolated instance(s) of a missing test on an individual lot used.

Major deficiency (3 points) if:
· Numerous instances of missing tests on an individual lot used.
· Single/isolated instance(s) of the same missing test from multiple lots used.

Non-compliance (0 points) if:
· There are no CoAs or other documentation available for the material being used.
· Fundamental failure to provide evidence for required tests performed on the lots used.

3.09.04: Are other non-synthetic crop treatments used as an input (e.g. compost teas, fish
emulsions, fish meal, blood meal, "bio fertilizers")?
Total points 0: Information gathering question. Examples include but are not limited to compost teas (also
known as agricultural teas), fish emulsions, fish meal, blood meal, inoculants (beneficial microbes), and
"bio fertilizers" that are produced from animal materials.

3.09.04a: Is fertilizer being used where the country regulations/guidelines ban the use of such
materials (e.g., Californian Leafy Green Commodity Specific Guidelines)? ANY DOWN SCORE IN
THIS QUESTION RESULTS IN AN AUTOMATIC FAILURE OF THE AUDIT.
Total compliance (15 points): Some commodity specific guidelines have rules regarding the use of
specific fertilizer types, e.g. Californian Leafy Green Commodity Specific Guidelines bans the use of
biosolids and untreated animal manure.

Automatic Failure (0 points) if:
· There is a single incidence of fertilizer being used where the country regulations/guidelines

     ban their use.

3.09.04b: Are there fertilizer use records available for each growing area, including application
records?

PGFS-R-063                                    Page 61 of 90  October 8, 2021
©2021 Primus Group, Inc. All rights reserved                 Rev. 1

Total compliance (15 points): Records should be legible and at least detail the date of application, type of
fertilizer, amount, method of application (drip, bulk, etc.), where it was applied and operator name. There
should be sufficient identification information in the records that would make it possible to trace an
application back to the site if needed. There should be an interval between application and harvest of at
least 45 days for non-synthetic crop treatments and compost, and an interval of at least 120 days (but
ideally 9 months) for untreated animal manure. A shorter interval is possible, if the fertilizer has been
through a physical/chemical/biological process to inactivate human pathogens and the auditee has
validation study documentation that shows that the material is safe. Validation studies must be applicable
to the situation at hand and care should be taken not to over extrapolate. There should be confirmation
that monitoring records of the validation study's key requirements are being kept and that these
monitoring records are being verified. The applications should be incorporated into the soil prior to
planting or bud burst for tree crops.

Minor deficiency (10 points) if:
· Single/isolated instance(s) of errors or omissions in the records.

Major deficiency (5 points) if:
· Numerous instances of errors or omissions in the records.

Non-compliance (0 points) if:
· Fundamental failure to maintain records.
· No records are available.
· The interval between application and harvest is not being respected, and there is no validation study

     to verify application timelines.
· Any incident of direct product contamination constitutes as a health hazard and is viewed as

     adulteration. Revert to Q 3.05.10.

3.09.04c: Are there Certificate(s) of Analysis (CoA), specifications, product label or other
documents available for review provided by the supplier stating the components of the material?
Total compliance (10 points): Certificate(s) of Analysis (CoA), letters of guarantee or other formal
documentation from the fertilizer manufacturer's or supplier(s) should be current and state any inert or
active ingredient substances used as "fillers" (e.g., clay pellets, granular limestone). Concerns are for
heavy metals that may affect human health (e.g. Arsenic (As), Cadmium (Cd), Chromium (Cr), Copper
(Cu), Lead (Pb), Mercury (Hg), Molybdenum (Mo), Nickel (Ni), Selenium (Se), Zinc (Zn)). See Table 2-1
Ceiling Concentrations for Pollutants, EPA Guide to 40 CFR Part 503 Rule. There should be sufficient
identification information that would make it possible to trace back to the source if needed, therefore, only
approved suppliers should be used limited to those firms demonstrating consistent compliance with
prevailing national/local standards and guidelines.

https://apps1.cdfa.ca.gov/fertilizerproducts/
http://library.state.or.us/repository/2007/200701251422434/index.pdf
https://agr.wa.gov/departments/pesticides-and-fertilizers/fertilizers/product-database
https://cms.agr.wa.gov/WSDAKentico/Documents/Pubs/707-
382HeavyMetalsTestRequirements.pdf?/707-382HeavyMetalsTestRequirements

Minor deficiency (7 points) if:
· Documentation is available, but there is no reference to the inert material that is used.

Major deficiency (3 points) if:
· The documentation demonstrates that heavy metals that can affect human health are used as fillers

     without specific concentration information indicating standards.

Non-compliance (0 points) if:
· There is no documentation available detailing the components of the material.
· Documentation is provided, but is not in sufficient detail to be able to trace back to the source.

PGFS-R-063                                    Page 62 of 90  October 8, 2021
©2021 Primus Group, Inc. All rights reserved                                             Rev. 1

3.09.04d: Are there Certificate(s) of Analysis (CoA) from the supplier(s) that cover pathogen
testing (plus any other legally/best practice required testing) and does the grower have relevant
letters of guarantee regarding supplier SOPs and logs?
Total compliance (15 points): There should be evidence that each laboratory test result (certificate of
analysis) provided is traceable to each material used. (e.g., CoA is traced to each lot of crop treatment
used). Tests should include microbiological analyses. As minimum, for non-synthetic crop treatments
(e.g., compost teas, fish emulsions, fish meal, blood meal, "bio fertilizers") and for animal based compost
microbial testing should include Salmonella spp., E. coli O157:H7, and Listeria monocytogenes at
Negative or <DL and include fecal coliforms/gram at < 1000 MPN of total solids and any other pathogens
appropriate for the source of material using approved sampling and testing methods (e.g., AOAC and an
accredited laboratory). All local and national legislation should also be followed.
Where legally allowed, a reduced sampling rate is possible if the material is produced by the auditee (e.g.
mushroom growing operations with in-house compost production) and has been through a validated
physical/chemical/biological process to inactivate human pathogens (Salmonella spp., E. coli O157:H7,
Listeria monocytogenes) and show fecal coliforms/gram <1000 MPN. The auditee has the test analyses
that show that the material is safe and proper process control records (e.g., time/temperature records and
calibration records, such as, temperature probe) are maintained and available during the audit. Validation
studies used must be applicable to the situation at hand and care should be taken not to over extrapolate.
The grower should have proof that compost suppliers have cross contamination SOPs and
temperature/turning logs.

Sampling Plan Options below may be used to determine the definition of lots produced. There should be
an indication from the supplier/producer of how lots are determined (i.e. from the information here or from
another method). The sampling plans below are taken from current regulations in the state of California
(related to bio-solids) and recognized manure-based compost guidelines included under the Leafy
Greens Marketing Agreement.

Option 1

Amount of Biosolids Compost Feedstock

Metric Tons per 365-day Period                               Frequency

Greater than zero but annually fewer than 290                Annually

Equal to or greater than 290 but fewer than 1,500            Quarterly

Equal to or greater than 1,500 but fewer than 15,000         Bimonthly (Every 2 months)

Equal to or greater than 15,000                              Monthly

Source: State of California Regulations: Title 14, Natural Resources--Division 7, CIWMB

Chapter 3.1. Composting Operations Regulatory Requirements

 Option 2
 Testing Frequency: Each lot (post Phase II, before use with mushroom production). A lot is defined as
 a unit of production equal to or less than 5,000 cubic yards (3,823 cubic meters)
 Source: Adapted from Composted Soil Amendments (containing animal manure or animal products)
 included in the LGMA Commodity Specific Food Safety Guidelines for the Production and Harvest of
 Lettuce and Leafy Greens".
 Rationale: A "lot" of compost may vary depending upon the process implemented. The objective of the
 audit scheme is to provide a means of verifying the heat treatments systems applied to compost has
 been effective.

Reference:
21 CFR Part 112 Subpart F- Biological Soil Amendments of Animal Origin and Human Waste, for details
on treatment processes and microbial testing standards.
https://www.accessdata.fda.gov/scripts/cdrh/cfdocs/cfCFR/CFRSearch.cfm?CFRPart=112&showFR=1&s
ubpartNode=21:2.0.1.1.12.6
California state regulations for compost (CCR Title 14 - Chapter 3.1 - Article 7;

PGFS-R-063                                    Page 63 of 90                              October 8, 2021
©2021 Primus Group, Inc. All rights reserved                 Rev. 1

https://govt.westlaw.com/calregs/Document/I978C116BD2DF4472ACEADBAE443C29D1?contextData=
%28sc.Default%29&transitionType=Default
NOP 5021 Guidance Compost and Vermicompost in Organic Crop Production;
https://www.ams.usda.gov/sites/default/files/media/5021.pdf

Minor deficiency (10 points) if:
· Single/isolated instance(s) of a missing test on an individual lot used.

Major deficiency (5 points) if:
· Numerous instances of missing tests on an individual lot used.
· Single/isolated instance(s) of the same missing test from multiple lots used.

Non-compliance (0 points) if:
· There are no CoAs for the material being used.
· Fundamental failure to provide evidence for required tests performed on the lots used.

3.09.04e: Are there Certificate(s) of Analysis (CoA), letters of guarantee or other documents from
the supplier(s) that cover heavy metal testing?
Total compliance (10 points): Certificate(s) of Analysis (CoA), letters of guarantee or some other
documents from the non-synthetic crop treatment supplier(s) that covers heavy metal testing should be
available. Concerns are for heavy metals that may affect human health (e.g. Arsenic (As), Cadmium
(Cd), Chromium (Cr), Copper (Cu), Lead (Pb), Mercury (Hg), Molybdenum (Mo), Nickel (Ni), Selenium
(Se), Zinc (Zn)). All local and national legislation should also be followed.
https://www.epa.gov/sites/production/files/2018-12/documents/plain-english-guide-part503-biosolids-
rule.pdf
https://www.govinfo.gov/content/pkg/CFR-2018-title40-vol32/xml/CFR-2018-title40-vol32-
part503.xml#seqnum503.13
https://www.planetnatural.com/composting-101/compost-concerns/heavy-metals/

Minor deficiency (7 points) if:
· Single/isolated instance(s) of a missing test on an individual lot used.

Major deficiency (3 points) if:
· Numerous instances of missing tests on an individual lot used.
· Single/isolated instance(s) of the same missing test from multiple lots used.

Non-compliance (0 points) if:
· There are no CoAs or other documentation available for the material being used.
· Fundamental failure to provide evidence for required tests performed on the lots used.

3.09.05: Are any soil or substrate amendments used as an input (e.g. plant by-products, humates,
seaweed, inoculants, conditioners, etc.)?
Total points 0: Information gathering question. This refers to soil or substrate amendments (except
inorganic nutrients/fertilizers) used that do not contain animal products and/or animal manures. Examples
include but are not limited to plant by-products (e.g., coir), humates (e.g., peat), seaweed, conditioners
(e.g., vermiculite), etc.

3.09.05a: Is fertilizer being used where the country regulations/guidelines ban the use of such
materials (e.g., Californian Leafy Green Commodity Specific Guidelines)? ANY DOWN SCORE IN
THIS QUESTION RESULTS IN AN AUTOMATIC FAILURE OF THE AUDIT.
Total compliance (15 points): Some commodity specific guidelines have rules regarding the use of
specific fertilizer types, e.g. Californian Leafy Green Commodity Specific Guidelines bans the use of
biosolids and untreated animal manure.

Automatic Failure (0 points) if:

PGFS-R-063                                    Page 64 of 90  October 8, 2021
©2021 Primus Group, Inc. All rights reserved                 Rev. 1

· There is a single incidence of fertilizer being used where the country regulations/guidelines
     ban their use.

3.09.05b: Are there fertilizer use records available for each growing area, including application
records?
Total compliance (15 points): Records should be legible and at least detail date of application, type of
fertilizer, amount, method of application (drip, bulk, etc.), where it was applied and operator name. There
should be sufficient identification information in the records that would make it possible to trace an
application back to the site if needed.
There should be an interval between application and harvest of at least 45 days for non-synthetic crop
treatments and compost, and an interval of at least 120 days (but ideally 9 months) for untreated animal
manure. A shorter interval is possible if the fertilizer has been through a physical/chemical/biological
process to inactivate human pathogens and the auditee has validation study documentation that shows
that the material is safe. Validation studies must be applicable to the situation at hand and care should be
taken not to over extrapolate. There should be confirmation that monitoring records of the validation
study's key requirements are being kept and that these monitoring records are being verified. The
applications should be incorporated into the soil prior to planting or bud burst for tree crops.

Minor deficiency (10 points) if:
· Single/isolated instance(s) of errors or omissions in the records.

Major deficiency (5 points) if:
· Numerous instances of errors or omissions in the records.

Non-compliance (0 points) if:
· Fundamental failure to maintain records.
· No records are available.
· The interval between application and harvest is not being respected, and there is no validation study

     to verify application timelines.
· Any incident of direct product contamination constitutes as a health hazard and is viewed as

     adulteration. Revert to Q 3.05.10.

3.09.05c: Are there Certificate(s) of Analysis (CoA), specifications, product label or other
documents available for review provided by the supplier stating the components of the material?
Total compliance (10 points): Certificate(s) of Analysis (CoA), letters of guarantee or other formal
documentation from the fertilizer manufacturer's or supplier(s) should be current and state any inert or
active ingredient substances used as "fillers" (e.g., clay pellets, granular limestone). Concerns are for
heavy metals that may affect human health (e.g. Arsenic (As), Cadmium (Cd), Chromium (Cr), Copper
(Cu), Lead (Pb), Mercury (Hg), Molybdenum (Mo), Nickel (Ni), Selenium (Se), Zinc (Zn)). See Table 2-1
Ceiling Concentrations for Pollutants, EPA Guide to 40 CFR Part 503 Rule. There should be sufficient
identification information that would make it possible to trace back to the source if needed, therefore, only
approved suppliers should be used limited to those firms demonstrating consistent compliance with
prevailing national/local standards and guidelines.

https://apps1.cdfa.ca.gov/fertilizerproducts/
http://library.state.or.us/repository/2007/200701251422434/index.pdf
https://agr.wa.gov/departments/pesticides-and-fertilizers/fertilizers/product-database
https://cms.agr.wa.gov/WSDAKentico/Documents/Pubs/707-
382HeavyMetalsTestRequirements.pdf?/707-382HeavyMetalsTestRequirements

Minor deficiency (7 points) if:
· Documentation is available, but there is no reference to the inert material that is used.

Major deficiency (3 points) if:

PGFS-R-063                                    Page 65 of 90  October 8, 2021
©2021 Primus Group, Inc. All rights reserved                 Rev. 1

· The documentation demonstrates that heavy metals that can affect human health are used as fillers
     without specific concentration information indicating standards.

Non-compliance (0 points) if:
· There is no documentation available detailing the components of the material.
· Documentation is provided but is not in sufficient detail to be able to trace back to the source.

3.09.05d: Are there Certificate(s) of Analysis (CoA) and/or letters of guarantee stating that the
materials used are free from animal products and/or animal manures?
Total compliance (15 points): There should be Certificate(s) of Analysis (CoA) and/or letters of guarantee
from the fertilizer supplier, stating that the materials they are supplying are free from animal products
and/or animal manures. A statement of ingredients or letter from suppliers attesting this fact is
acceptable. Auditor should match the names of the materials being used with the CoA's and/or letters of
guarantee.

Minor deficiency (10 points) if:
· Single/isolated instance(s) of missing records.

Major deficiency (5 points) if:
· Numerous instances of missing records.

Non-compliance (0 points) if:
· Fundamental failure to maintain records.
· No records are available.

3.09.06: Are inorganic fertilizers used as an input (e.g. ammonium nitrate, ammonium sulfate,
chemically synthesized urea, etc.)?
Total points 0: Information gathering question. Examples of manufactured inorganic fertilizers include
ammonium nitrate, ammonium sulfate, chemically synthesized urea, etc. These are sometimes called
synthetic fertilizers.

3.09.06a: Is fertilizer being used where the country regulations/guidelines ban the use of such
materials (e.g., Californian Leafy Green Commodity Specific Guidelines)? ANY DOWN SCORE IN
THIS QUESTION RESULTS IN AN AUTOMATIC FAILURE OF THE AUDIT.
Total compliance (15 points): Some commodity specific guidelines have rules regarding the use of
specific fertilizer types, e.g. Californian Leafy Green Commodity Specific Guidelines bans the use of
biosolids and untreated animal manure.

Automatic Failure (0 points) if:
· There is a single incidence of fertilizer being used where the country regulations/guidelines

     ban their use.

3.09.06b: Are there fertilizer use records available for each growing area, including application
records?
Total compliance (15 points): Records should be legible and at least detail date of application, type of
fertilizer, amount, method of application (drip, bulk, etc.), where it was applied and operator name. There
should be sufficient identification information in the records that would make it possible to trace an
application back to the site if needed.

Minor deficiency (10 points) if:
· Single/isolated instance(s) of missing records.

Major deficiency (5 points) if:
· Numerous instances of missing records.

PGFS-R-063                                    Page 66 of 90  October 8, 2021
©2021 Primus Group, Inc. All rights reserved                 Rev. 1

Non-compliance (0 points) if:
· Fundamental failure to maintain records.
· No records are available.

3.09.06c: Are there Certificate(s) of Analysis (CoA), specifications, product label or other
documents available for review by the supplier stating the components of the material?
Total compliance (10 points): Certificate(s) of Analysis (CoA), letters of guarantee or other formal
documentation from the fertilizer manufacturer's or supplier(s) should be current and state any inert or
active ingredient substances used as "fillers" (e.g., clay pellets, granular limestone). Concerns are for
heavy metals that may affect human health (e.g. Arsenic (As), Cadmium (Cd), Chromium (Cr), Copper
(Cu), Lead (Pb), Mercury (Hg), Molybdenum (Mo), Nickel (Ni), Selenium (Se), Zinc (Zn)). See Table 2-1
Ceiling Concentrations for Pollutants, EPA Guide to 40 CFR Part 503 Rule. There should be sufficient
identification information that would make it possible to trace back to the source if needed, therefore, only
approved suppliers should be used limited to those firms demonstrating consistent compliance with
prevailing national/local standards and guidelines.

https://apps1.cdfa.ca.gov/fertilizerproducts/
http://www.health.state.mn.us/divs/eh/risk/studies/metals.html
https://agr.wa.gov/departments/pesticides-and-fertilizers/fertilizers/product-database
https://cms.agr.wa.gov/WSDAKentico/Documents/Pubs/707-
382HeavyMetalsTestRequirements.pdf?/707-382HeavyMetalsTestRequirements

Minor deficiency (7 points) if:
· Documentation is available, but there is no reference to the inert material that is used.

Major deficiency (3 points) if:
· The documentation demonstrates that heavy metals that can affect human health are used as fillers,

     without specific concentration information indicating standards.

Non-compliance (0 points) if:
· There is no documentation available detailing the components of the material.
· Documentation is provided but is not in sufficient detail to be able to trace back to the source.

Irrigation/Water Use

3.10.01: Is municipal or district water used in the operation?
What is this water source used for (e.g., irrigation, crop protection sprays, fertigation, frost/freeze
protection, cooling, dust abatement, etc.)?
What type of irrigation methods are used (e.g., micro-irrigation, drip, overhead, flood irrigation,
furrow irrigation, seepage irrigation, hydroponic (specify type))?
Does the water come into contact with the edible portion of the crop?
Total points 0: Information gathering question.

3.10.01a: Are generic E. coli tests conducted on the water (taken from the closest practical point
of use) at the required and/or expected frequency? A ZERO POINT (NONCOMPLIANCE) DOWN
SCORE IN THIS QUESTION RESULTS IN AUTOMATIC FAILURE OF THIS AUDIT.
Total compliance (15 points): Microbial water testing, including generic E. coli, should occur for all water
sources used for any growing activities like crop protection/fertilizer and frost or freeze prevention
programs. Water samples should be taken from as close to the point of use as is practical. At least one
sample per distribution system is required. If there are multiple sampling points in a distribution system,
then samples are taken from a different location each test (randomize or rotate locations).
For farm and indoor agriculture operations, one sample per water source is collected and tested prior to
use if >60 days since the last test of the water source. Additional samples are taken at least monthly
during use of the water source. A less frequent testing is acceptable if supported by a valid documented
risk assessment although there should be at least one water test per season. Where there are more

PGFS-R-063                                    Page 67 of 90  October 8, 2021
©2021 Primus Group, Inc. All rights reserved                 Rev. 1

stringent federal, national or local requirements, those requirements should be followed. If a risk
assessment is used to define the frequency, it should include at a minimum the water source, method of
application (edible product contact vs non- edible product contact), reference or evidence to the microbial
historical data of the water source, and its vulnerability to contamination. A vulnerable water source is one
for which there is a potential risk of contamination by fecal matter (e.g. animals grazing upstream of a
river abstraction point, overloading of a sewage treatment plant by storm water) or other potential risk
factors. As examples, vulnerable sources may be surface water (rivers, lakes, natural ponds), reservoirs
supplied by well water or rain water, groundwater collected from shallow wells. Other sources may be
vulnerable under specific circumstances and the degree of vulnerability should be established by the
grower's risk assessment. In the event the risk assessment indicates contamination risks, the operation
should implement adequate measures to prevent and/or mitigate product contamination

References:
https://extension.psu.edu/safe-uses-of-agricultural-water

https://gaps.cornell.edu/educational-materials/decision-trees/agricultural-water-production/

Minor deficiency (10 points) if:
· Single/isolated instance(s) of water testing not occurring at the right frequency.
· Sample(s) was not taken from the closest practical point of use.

Major deficiency (5 points) if:
· Numerous instances of water testing not occurring at the right frequency.

Automatic Failure (0 points) if:
· No microbiological test results are available.
· A water test has not been performed within the past 12 months.

3.10.01b: Do written procedures (SOPs) exist covering proper sampling protocols which include
where samples should be taken and how samples should be identified?
Total compliance (10 points): There should be documented procedures in place detailing how water
samples are taken in the growing area, including stating how samples should be identified i.e. clearly
naming the location that the sample was taken, the water source and the date (this is important in order to
be able to calculate geometric means). Samples should be taken at a point as close to the point of use as
possible where water contacts the crop, so as to test both the water source and the water distribution
system.

Minor deficiency (7 points) if:
· Single/isolated instance(s) of errors or omissions in the SOP.

Major deficiency (3 points) if:
· Numerous instances of errors or omissions in the SOP.

Non-compliance (0 points) if:
· There are no sampling SOPs.

3.10.01c: Do written procedures (SOPs) exist covering corrective measures for unsuitable or
abnormal water testing results?
Total compliance (10 points): Written procedures (SOPs) should exist covering corrective measures not
only for the discovery of unsuitable or abnormal water test results but also as a preparation on how to
handle such findings.

Minor deficiency (7 points) if:
· Single/isolated instance(s) of errors or omissions in the SOP.

Major deficiency (3 points) if:

PGFS-R-063                                    Page 68 of 90  October 8, 2021
©2021 Primus Group, Inc. All rights reserved                 Rev. 1

· Numerous instances of errors or omissions in the SOP.

Non-compliance (0 points) if:
· There no SOPs covering corrective measures for unsuitable/abnormal water test results.
· The written SOPs were not followed when unsuitable or abnormal water testing results were recorded

     in the last 12 months.

3.10.01d: If unsuitable or abnormal results have been detected, have documented corrective
measures been performed?
Total compliance (15 points): For generic E. coli (unless more stringent guidelines/laws in existence)
<126MPN (or CFU)/100mL (rolling geometric mean n=5) and <235MPN (or CFU)/100mL for any single
sample. Where thresholds have been exceeded, there should be recorded corrective actions that prevent
or mitigate product contamination, including investigations, water retests, and if required, crop testing (E.
coli O157:H7 and Salmonella - zero tolerance). Failure to take corrective actions, prevent or mitigate
product contamination when there is evidence of high levels or an upward trend of E. coli may result in an
automatic failure of the audit. For farms or indoor agriculture operations following the FDA's Produce
Safety Rule, the operation needs to ensure they are meeting the requirements for samples to calculate
the Geometric Mean (GM) and Statistical Threshold (STV).

Reference:
https://producesafetyalliance.cornell.edu/food-safety-modernization-act/produce-safety-rule/

Minor deficiency (10 points) if:
· Single/isolated instance(s) of water sources being used without corrective actions being performed

     upon receipt of unsuitable or abnormal water test results showing >235 MPN for any single sample or
     >126 MPN for a geometric mean.

Major deficiency (5 points) if:
· Numerous instances of water sources being used without corrective actions being performed after

     receipt of unsuitable or abnormal water test results showing >235 MPN for any single sample or >126
     MPN for a geometric mean.

Non-compliance (0 points) if:
· No corrective measures have been performed.
· Retests were performed greater than one month after receiving the unsuitable or abnormal water test

     results.
· Contaminated water is being consistently used for product contact use without evidence of

     corrective actions being implemented. (This qualifies as an automatic failure and should be
     scored under 3.05.10).

3.10.01e: Where anti-microbial water treatment (e.g. chlorination, U.V., ozone, etc.) are used are
there records of the monitoring frequencies, results, and where necessary the corrective actions?
Total compliance (15 points): Where any water treatment is performed at the source (e.g., well, canal,
holding tank) this should be monitored. The strength of anti-microbial chemicals should be checked using
an appropriate method for the anti-microbial in use (e.g., chemical reaction-based test, test probe or as
recommended by the disinfectant supplier). If using an anti-microbial treatment system (e.g. chlorination),
there should be monitoring logs completed on at least a daily basis when the system is being used. Any
well "shocking" should be recorded.

Minor deficiency (10 points) if:
· Single/isolated instance(s) of an error or omission in the records or corrective action details.
· Single/isolated instance(s) of checks not being carried out at the required frequencies.
· Single/isolate instance(s) of incorrect parameters being monitored.

Major deficiency (5 points) if:

PGFS-R-063                                    Page 69 of 90  October 8, 2021
©2021 Primus Group, Inc. All rights reserved                 Rev. 1

· Multiple instances of errors or omissions in the records or corrective action details.
· Numerous instances of checks not being carried out at the required frequencies.
· Numerous instances of incorrect parameters being monitored.
· No supporting documentation of the monitoring method and/or frequency being used.

Non-compliance (0 points) if:
· No records.
· Monitoring frequency is insufficient to verify the process is in control.
· Monitoring parameters in use are insufficient to verify the process is in control.
· Failure to maintain records properly.
· Failure to record corrective action details.

3.10.01f: Are there records for periodic visual inspection of the water source with corrective
actions (where necessary)?
Total compliance (5 points): "Records" may include calendar books with commentary regarding what was
checked, the condition, unusual occurrences, (e.g. issues regarding well cap, well casing, seals, piping
tanks, treatment equipment, cross connections, trash, animal presence, pooled water, etc.), and any
action taken. The appropriate documentation should be available for review.

Minor deficiency (3 points) if:
· Single/isolated instance(s) of an error or omission in the records or corrective action details.

Major deficiency (1 point) if:
· Multiple instances of errors or omissions in the records or corrective action details.

Non-compliance (0 points) if:
· Failure to maintain records.
· Failure to record corrective action details.

3.10.02: Is well water used in the operation?
What is this water source used for (e.g., irrigation, crop protection sprays, fertigation, frost/freeze
protection, cooling, dust abatement, etc.)?
What type of irrigation methods are used (e.g., micro-irrigation, drip, overhead, flood irrigation,
furrow irrigation, seepage irrigation, hydroponic (specify type))?
Does the water come into contact with the edible portion of the crop?
Total points 0: Information gathering question.

3.10.02a: Are generic E. coli tests conducted on the water (taken from the closest practical point
of use) at the required and/or expected frequency? A ZERO POINT (NONCOMPLIANCE) DOWN
SCORE IN THIS QUESTION RESULTS IN AUTOMATIC FAILURE OF THIS AUDIT.
Total compliance (15 points): Microbial water testing, including generic E. coli, should occur for all water
sources used for any growing activities like crop protection/fertilizer and frost or freeze prevention
programs. Water samples should be taken from as close to the point of use as is practical. At least one
sample per distribution system is required. If there are multiple sampling points in a distribution system,
then samples are taken from a different location each test (randomize or rotate locations).
For farm and indoor agriculture operations, one sample per water source is collected and tested prior to
use if >60 days since the last test of the water source. Additional samples are taken at least monthly
during use of the water source. A less frequent testing is acceptable if supported by a valid documented
risk assessment although there should be at least one water test per season. Where there are more
stringent federal, national or local requirements, those requirements should be followed. If a risk
assessment is used to define the frequency, it should include at a minimum the water source, method of
application (edible product contact vs non- edible product contact), reference or evidence to the microbial
historical data of the water source, and its vulnerability to contamination. A vulnerable water source is one
for which there is a potential risk of contamination by fecal matter (e.g. animals grazing upstream of a
river abstraction point, overloading of a sewage treatment plant by storm water) or other potential risk

PGFS-R-063                                    Page 70 of 90  October 8, 2021
©2021 Primus Group, Inc. All rights reserved                 Rev. 1

factors. As examples, vulnerable sources may be surface water (rivers, lakes, natural ponds), reservoirs
supplied by well water or rainwater, groundwater collected from shallow wells. Other sources may be
vulnerable under specific circumstances and the degree of vulnerability should be established by the
grower's risk assessment. In the event the risk assessment indicates contamination risks, the operation
should implement adequate measures to prevent and/or mitigate product contamination.

References:
https://extension.psu.edu/safe-uses-of-agricultural-water
https://gaps.cornell.edu/educational-materials/decision-trees/agricultural-water-production/

Minor deficiency (10 points) if:
· Single/isolated instance(s) of water testing not occurring at the right frequency.
· Sample was not taken from the closest practical point of use.

Major deficiency (5 points) if:
· Numerous instances of water testing not occurring at the right frequency.

Automatic Failure (0 points) if:
· No microbiological test results are available.
· A water test has not been performed within the past 12 months.

3.10.02b: Do written procedures (SOPs) exist covering proper sampling protocols which include
where samples should be taken and how samples should be identified?
Total compliance (10 points): There should be documented procedures in place detailing how water
samples are taken in the growing area, including stating how samples should be identified i.e. clearly
naming the location that the sample was taken, the water source and the date (this is important in order to
be able to calculate geometric means). Samples should be taken at a point as close to the point of use as
possible where water contacts the crop, so as to test both the water source and the water distribution
system.

Minor deficiency (7 points) if:
· Single/isolated instance(s) of errors or omissions in the SOP.

Major deficiency (3 points) if:
· Numerous instances of errors or omissions in the SOP.

Non-compliance (0 points) if:
· There are no sampling SOPs.

3.10.02c: Do written procedures (SOPs) exist covering corrective measures for unsuitable or
abnormal water testing results?
Total compliance (10 points): Written procedures (SOPs) should exist covering corrective measures not
only for the discovery of unsuitable or abnormal water test results but also as a preparation on how to
handle such findings.

Minor deficiency (7 points) if:
· Single/isolated instance(s) of errors or omissions in the SOP.

Major deficiency (3 points) if:
· Numerous instances of errors or omissions in the SOP.

Non-compliance (0 points) if:
· There are no SOPs covering corrective measures for unsuitable/abnormal water test results.
· The written SOPs were not followed when unsuitable or abnormal water testing results were recorded

     in the last 12 months.

PGFS-R-063                                    Page 71 of 90  October 8, 2021
©2021 Primus Group, Inc. All rights reserved                 Rev. 1

3.10.02d: If unsuitable or abnormal results have been detected, have documented corrective
measures been performed?
Total compliance (15 points): For generic E. coli (unless more stringent guidelines/laws in existence)
<126MPN (or CFU)/100mL (rolling geometric mean n=5) and <235MPN (or CFU)/100mL for any single
sample. Where thresholds have been exceeded, there should be recorded corrective actions that prevent
or mitigate product contamination, including investigations, water retests, and if required, crop testing (E.
coli O157:H7 and Salmonella - zero tolerance). Failure to take corrective actions, prevent or mitigate
product contamination when there is evidence of high levels or an upward trend of E. coli may result in an
automatic failure of the audit. For farms or indoor agriculture operations following the FDA's Produce
Safety Rule, the operation needs to ensure they are meeting the requirements for samples to calculate
the Geometric Mean (GM) and Statistical Threshold (STV).

Reference:
https://producesafetyalliance.cornell.edu/food-safety-modernization-act/produce-safety-rule/

Minor deficiency (10 points) if:
· Single/isolated instance(s) of water sources being used without corrective actions being performed

     upon receipt of unsuitable or abnormal water test results showing >235 MPN for any single sample or
     >126 MPN for a geometric mean.

Major deficiency (5 points) if:
· Numerous instances of water sources being used without corrective actions being performed one

     week after receipt of unsuitable or abnormal water test results showing >235 MPN for any single
     sample or >126 MPN for a geometric mean.

Non-compliance (0 points) if:
· No corrective measures have been performed.
· Retests were performed greater than one month after receiving the unsuitable or abnormal water test

     results.
· Contaminated water is being consistently used for product contact use without evidence of

     corrective actions being implemented. (This qualifies as an automatic failure and should be
     scored under 3.05.10.)

3.10.02e: Where anti-microbial water treatments (e.g. chlorination, U.V., ozone, etc.) are used, are
there records of the monitoring frequencies, results and where necessary the corrective actions?
Total compliance (15 points): Where any water treatment is performed at the source (e.g., well, canal,
holding tank) this should be monitored. The strength of anti-microbial chemicals should be checked using
an appropriate method for the anti-microbial in use (e.g., chemical reaction-based test, test probe, or as
recommended by the disinfectant supplier). If using an anti-microbial treatment system (e.g. chlorination),
there should be monitoring logs completed on at least a daily basis when the system is being used. Any
well "shocking" should be recorded.

Minor deficiency (10 points) if:
· Single/isolated instance(s) of an error or omission in the records or corrective action details.
· Single/isolated instance(s) of checks not being carried out at the required frequencies.
· Single/isolate instance(s) of incorrect parameters being monitored.

Major deficiency (5 points) if:
· Multiple instances of errors or omissions in the records or corrective action details.
· Numerous instances of checks not being carried out at the required frequencies.
· Numerous instances of incorrect parameters being monitored.
· No supporting documentation of the monitoring method and/or frequency being used.

Non-compliance (0 points) if:

PGFS-R-063                                    Page 72 of 90  October 8, 2021
©2021 Primus Group, Inc. All rights reserved                 Rev. 1

· No records.
· Monitoring frequency is insufficient to verify the process is in control.
· Monitoring parameters in use are insufficient to verify the process is in control.
· Failure to maintain records properly.
· Failure to record corrective action details.

3.10.02f: Are there records for periodic visual inspection of the water source with corrective
actions (where necessary)?
Total compliance (5 points): "Records" may include calendar books with commentary regarding what was
checked, the condition, unusual occurrences, (e.g. issues regarding well cap, well casing, seals, piping
tanks, treatment equipment, cross connections, trash, animal presence, pooled water, etc.), and any
action taken. The appropriate documentation should be available for review.

Minor deficiency (3 points) if:
· Single/isolated instance(s) of an error or omission in the records or corrective action details.

Major deficiency (1 point) if:
· Multiple instances of errors or omissions in the records or corrective action details.

Non-compliance (0 points) if:
· Failure to maintain records.
· Failure to record corrective action details.

3.10.03: Is non-flowing surface water (e.g., ponds, reservoirs, watersheds, etc.) used in the
operation?
What is this water source used for (e.g., irrigation, crop protection sprays, fertigation, frost/freeze
protection, cooling, dust abatement, etc.)?
What type of irrigation methods are used (e.g., micro-irrigation, drip, overhead, flood irrigation,
furrow irrigation, seepage irrigation, hydroponic (specify type))?
Does the water come into contact with the edible portion of the crop?
Total points 0: Information gathering question. Water sourced from ponds, reservoirs, watersheds or other
non-flowing surface water systems may carry more of a risk for contamination than closed water sources.
For surface waters, consider the impact of storm events on irrigation practices. Bacterial loads in surface
water are generally much higher than normal, and caution should be exercised when using these waters
for irrigation.

3.10.03a: Are generic E. coli tests conducted on the water (taken from the closest practical point
of use) at the required and/or expected frequency? A ZERO POINT (NONCOMPLIANCE) DOWN
SCORE IN THIS QUESTION RESULTS IN AUTOMATIC FAILURE OF THIS AUDIT.
Total compliance (15 points): Microbial water testing, including generic E. coli, should occur for all water
sources used for any growing activities like crop protection/fertilizer and frost or freeze prevention
programs. Water samples should be taken from as close to the point of use as is practical. At least one
sample per distribution system is required. If there are multiple sampling points in a distribution system,
then samples are taken from a different location each test (randomize or rotate locations).
For farm and indoor agriculture operations, one sample per water source is collected and tested prior to
use if >60 days since the last test of the water source. Additional samples are taken at least monthly
during use of the water source. A less frequent testing is acceptable if supported by a valid documented
risk assessment although there should be at least one water test per season. Where there are more
stringent federal, national or local requirements, those requirements should be followed. If a risk
assessment is used to define the frequency, it should include at a minimum the water source, method of
application (edible product contact vs non- edible product contact), reference or evidence to the microbial
historical data of the water source, and its vulnerability to contamination. A vulnerable water source is one
for which there is a potential risk of contamination by fecal matter (e.g. animals grazing upstream of a
river abstraction point, overloading of a sewage treatment plant by storm water) or other potential risk
factors. As examples, vulnerable sources may be surface water (rivers, lakes, natural ponds), reservoirs

PGFS-R-063                                    Page 73 of 90  October 8, 2021
©2021 Primus Group, Inc. All rights reserved                 Rev. 1

supplied by well water or rainwater, groundwater collected from shallow wells. Other sources may be
vulnerable under specific circumstances and the degree of vulnerability should be established by the
grower's risk assessment. In the event the risk assessment indicates contamination risks, the operation
should implement adequate measures to prevent and/or mitigate product contamination.
References:
https://extension.psu.edu/safe-uses-of-agricultural-water
https://gaps.cornell.edu/educational-materials/decision-trees/agricultural-water-production/

Minor deficiency (10 points) if:
· Single/isolated instance(s) of water testing not occurring at the right frequency.
· Sample was not taken from the closest practical point of use.

Major deficiency (5 points) if:
· Numerous instances of water testing not occurring at the right frequency.

Automatic Failure (0 points) if:
· No microbiological test results are available.
· A water test has not been performed within the past 12 months.

3.10.03b: Do written procedures (SOPs) exist covering proper sampling protocols which include
where samples should be taken and how samples should be identified?
Total compliance (10 points): There should be documented procedures in place detailing how water
samples are taken in the growing area, including stating how samples should be identified i.e. clearly
naming the location that the sample was taken, the water source and the date (this is important in order to
be able to calculate geometric means). Samples should be taken at a point as close to the point of use as
possible where water contacts the crop, so as to test both the water source and the water distribution
system.

Minor deficiency (7 points) if:
· Single/isolated instance(s) of errors or omissions in the SOP.

Major deficiency (3 points) if:
· Numerous instances of errors or omissions in the SOP.

Non-compliance (0 points) if:
· There are no sampling SOPs.

3.10.03c: Do written procedures (SOPs) exist covering corrective measures for unsuitable or
abnormal water testing results?
Total compliance (10 points): Written procedures (SOPs) should exist covering corrective measures not
only for the discovery of unsuitable or abnormal water test results but also as a preparation on how to
handle such findings.

Minor deficiency (7 points) if:
· Single/isolated instance(s) of errors or omissions in the SOP.

Major deficiency (3 points) if:
· Numerous instances of errors or omissions in the SOP.

Non-compliance (0 points) if:
· There are no SOPs covering corrective measures for unsuitable/abnormal water test results.
· The written SOPs were not followed when unsuitable or abnormal water testing results were recorded

     in the last 12 months.

PGFS-R-063                                    Page 74 of 90  October 8, 2021
©2021 Primus Group, Inc. All rights reserved                 Rev. 1

3.10.03d: If unsuitable or abnormal results have been detected, have documented corrective
measures been performed?
Total compliance (15 points): For generic E. coli (unless more stringent guidelines/laws in existence)
<126MPN (or CFU)/100mL (rolling geometric mean n=5) and <235MPN (or CFU)/100mL for any single
sample. Where thresholds have been exceeded, there should be recorded corrective actions that prevent
or mitigate product contamination, including investigations, water retests, and if required, crop testing (E.
coli O157:H7 and Salmonella - zero tolerance). Failure to take corrective actions, prevent or mitigate
product contamination when there is evidence of high levels or an upward trend of E. coli may result in an
automatic failure of the audit. For farms or indoor agriculture operations following the FDA's Produce
Safety Rule, the operation needs to ensure they are meeting the requirements for samples to calculate
the Geometric Mean (GM) and Statistical Threshold (STV).

Reference:
https://producesafetyalliance.cornell.edu/food-safety-modernization-act/produce-safety-rule/

Minor deficiency (10 points) if:
· Single/isolated instance(s) of water sources being used without corrective actions being performed

     upon receipt of unsuitable or abnormal water test results showing >235 MPN for any single sample or
     >126 MPN for a geometric mean.

Major deficiency (5 points) if:
· Numerous instances of water sources being used without corrective actions being performed one

     week after receipt of unsuitable or abnormal water test results showing >235 MPN for any single
     sample or >126 MPN for a geometric mean.

Non-compliance (0 points) if:
· No corrective measures have been performed.
· Retests were performed greater than one month after receiving the unsuitable or abnormal water test

     results.
· Contaminated water is being consistently used for product contact use without evidence of

     corrective actions being implemented. (This qualifies as an automatic failure and should be
     scored under 3.05.10.)

3.10.03e: Where anti-microbial water treatments (e.g. chlorination, U.V., ozone, etc.) are used, are
there records of the monitoring frequencies, results and where necessary the corrective actions?
Total compliance (15 points): Where any water treatment is performed at the source (e.g., well, canal,
holding tank) this should be monitored. The strength of anti-microbial chemicals should be checked using
an appropriate method for the anti-microbial in use (e.g., chemical reaction-based test, test probe, or as
recommended by the disinfectant supplier). If using an anti-microbial treatment system (e.g. chlorination),
there should be monitoring logs completed on at least a daily basis when the system is being used. Any
well "shocking" should be recorded.

Minor deficiency (10 points) if:
· Single/isolated instance(s) of an error or omission in the records or corrective action details.
· Single/isolated instance(s) of checks not being carried out at the required frequencies.
· Single/isolate instance(s) of incorrect parameters being monitored.

Major deficiency (5 points) if:
· Multiple instances of errors or omissions in the records or corrective action details.
· Numerous instances of checks not being carried out at the required frequencies.
· Numerous instances of incorrect parameters being monitored.
· No supporting documentation of the monitoring method and/or frequency being used.

Non-compliance (0 points) if:

PGFS-R-063                                    Page 75 of 90  October 8, 2021
©2021 Primus Group, Inc. All rights reserved                 Rev. 1

· No records.
· Monitoring frequency is insufficient to verify the process is in control.
· Monitoring parameters in use are insufficient to verify the process is in control.
· Failure to maintain records properly.
· Failure to record corrective action details.

3.10.03f: Are there records for periodic visual inspection of the water source with corrective
actions (where necessary)?
Total compliance (5 points): "Records" may include calendar books with commentary regarding what was
checked, the condition, unusual occurrences, (e.g. issues regarding well cap, well casing, seals, piping
tanks, treatment equipment, cross connections, trash, animal presence, pooled water, etc.), and any
action taken. The appropriate documentation should be available for review.

Minor deficiency (3 points) if:
· Single/isolated instance(s) of an error or omission in the records or corrective action details.

Major deficiency (1 point) if:
· Multiple instances of errors or omissions in the records or corrective action details.

Non-compliance (0 points) if:
· Failure to maintain records.
· Failure to record corrective action details.

3.10.04: Is open flowing surface water (e.g., rivers, canals, ditches, etc.) used in the operation?
What is this water source used for (e.g., irrigation, crop protection sprays, fertigation, frost/freeze
protection, cooling, dust abatement, etc.)?
What type of irrigation methods are used (e.g., micro-irrigation, drip, overhead, flood irrigation,
furrow irrigation, seepage irrigation, hydroponic (specify type))?
Does the water come into contact with the edible portion of the crop?
Total points 0: Information gathering question. Water sourced from canals, rivers, ditches or other open
flowing surface water systems may carry more of a risk for contamination than closed water sources. For
surface waters, consider the impact of storm events on irrigation practices. Bacterial loads in surface
water are generally much higher than other sources, and caution should be exercised when using these
waters for irrigation.

3.10.04a: Are generic E. coli tests conducted on the water (taken from the closest practical point
of use) at the required and/or expected frequency? A ZERO POINT (NONCOMPLIANCE) DOWN
SCORE IN THIS QUESTION RESULTS IN AUTOMATIC FAILURE OF THIS AUDIT.
Total compliance (15 points): Microbial water testing, including generic E. coli, should occur for all water
sources used for any growing activities like crop protection/fertilizer and frost or freeze prevention
programs. Water samples should be taken from as close to the point of use as is practical. At least one
sample per distribution system is required. If there are multiple sampling points in a distribution system,
then samples are taken from a different location each test (randomize or rotate locations).
For farm and indoor agriculture operations, one sample per water source is collected and tested prior to
use if >60 days since the last test of the water source. Additional samples are taken at least monthly
during use of the water source. A less frequent testing is acceptable if supported by a valid documented
risk assessment although there should be at least one water test per season. Where there are more
stringent federal, national or local requirements, those requirements should be followed. If a risk
assessment is used to define the frequency, it should include at a minimum the water source, method of
application (edible product contact vs non- edible product contact), reference or evidence to the microbial
historical data of the water source, and its vulnerability to contamination. A vulnerable water source is one
for which there is a potential risk of contamination by fecal matter (e.g. animals grazing upstream of a
river abstraction point, overloading of a sewage treatment plant by storm water) or other potential risk
factors. As examples, vulnerable sources may be surface water (rivers, lakes, natural ponds), reservoirs
supplied by well water or rainwater, groundwater collected from shallow wells. Other sources may be

PGFS-R-063                                    Page 76 of 90  October 8, 2021
©2021 Primus Group, Inc. All rights reserved                 Rev. 1

vulnerable under specific circumstances and the degree of vulnerability should be established by the
grower's risk assessment. In the event the risk assessment indicates contamination risks, the operation
should implement adequate measures to prevent and/or mitigate product contamination.

References:
https://extension.psu.edu/safe-uses-of-agricultural-water
https://gaps.cornell.edu/educational-materials/decision-trees/agricultural-water-production/

Minor deficiency (10 points) if:
· Single/isolated instance(s) of water testing not occurring at the right frequency.
· Sample was not taken from the closest practical point of use.

Major deficiency (5 points) if:
· Numerous instances of water testing not occurring at the right frequency.

Automatic Failure (0 points) if:
· No microbiological test results are available.
· A water test has not been performed within the past 12 months.

3.10.04b: Do written procedures (SOPs) exist covering proper sampling protocols which include
where samples should be taken and how samples should be identified?
Total compliance (10 points): There should be documented procedures in place detailing how water
samples are taken in the growing area, including stating how samples should be identified i.e. clearly
naming the location that the sample was taken, the water source and the date (this is important in order to
be able to calculate geometric means). Samples should be taken at a point as close to the point of use as
possible where water contacts the crop, so as to test both the water source and the water distribution
system.

Minor deficiency (7 points) if:
     · Single/isolated instance(s) of errors or omissions in the SOP.

Major deficiency (3 points) if:
     · Numerous instances of errors or omissions in the SOP.

Non-compliance (0 points) if:
· There are no sampling SOPs.

3.10.04c: Do written procedures (SOPs) exist covering corrective measures for unsuitable or
abnormal water testing results?
Total compliance (10 points): Written procedures (SOPs) should exist covering corrective measures not
only for the discovery of unsuitable or abnormal water test results but also as a preparation on how to
handle such findings.

Minor deficiency (7 points) if:
· Single/isolated instance(s) of errors or omissions in the SOP.

Major deficiency (3 points) if:
· Numerous instances of errors or omissions in the SOP.

Non-compliance (0 points) if:
· There are no SOPs covering corrective measures for unsuitable/abnormal water test results.
· The written SOPs were not followed when unsuitable or abnormal water testing results were recorded

     in the last 12 months.

PGFS-R-063                                    Page 77 of 90  October 8, 2021
©2021 Primus Group, Inc. All rights reserved                 Rev. 1

3.10.04d: If unsuitable or abnormal results have been detected, have documented corrective
measures been performed?
Total compliance (15 points): For generic E. coli (unless more stringent guidelines/laws in existence)
<126MPN (or CFU)/100mL (rolling geometric mean n=5) and <235MPN (or CFU)/100mL for any single
sample. Where thresholds have been exceeded, there should be recorded corrective actions that prevent
or mitigate product contamination, including investigations, water retests, and if required, crop testing (E.
coli O157:H7 and Salmonella - zero tolerance). Failure to take corrective actions, prevent or mitigate
product contamination when there is evidence of high levels or an upward trend of E. coli may result in an
automatic failure of the audit. For farms or indoor agriculture operations following the FDA's Produce
Safety Rule, the operation needs to ensure they are meeting the requirements for samples to calculate
the Geometric Mean (GM) and Statistical Threshold (STV).
Reference:
https://producesafetyalliance.cornell.edu/food-safety-modernization-act/produce-safety-rule/

Minor deficiency (10 points) if:
· Single/isolated instance(s) of water sources being used without corrective actions being performed

     upon receipt of unsuitable or abnormal water test results showing >235 MPN for any single sample or
     >126 MPN for a geometric mean.

Major deficiency (5 points) if:
· Numerous instances of water sources being used without corrective actions being performed one

     week after receipt of unsuitable or abnormal water test results showing >235 MPN for any single
     sample or >126 MPN for a geometric mean.

Non-compliance (0 points) if:
· No corrective measures have been performed.
· Retests were performed greater than one month after receiving the unsuitable or abnormal water test

     results.
· Contaminated water is being consistently used for product contact use without evidence of

     corrective actions being implemented. (This qualifies as an automatic failure and should be
     scored under 3.05.10.)

3.10.04e: Where anti-microbial water treatments (e.g. chlorination, U.V., ozone, etc.) are used, are
there records of the monitoring frequencies, results and where necessary the corrective actions?
Total compliance (15 points): Where any water treatment is performed at the source (e.g., well, canal,
holding tank) this should be monitored. The strength of anti-microbial chemicals should be checked using
an appropriate method for the anti-microbial in use (e.g., chemical reaction-based test, test probe, or as
recommended by the disinfectant supplier). If using an anti-microbial treatment system (e.g. chlorination),
there should be monitoring logs completed on at least a daily basis when the system is being used. Any
well "shocking" should be recorded.

Minor deficiency (10 points) if:
· Single/isolated instance(s) of an error or omission in the records or corrective action details.
· Single/isolated instance(s) of checks not being carried out at the required frequencies.
· Single/isolate instance(s) of incorrect parameters being monitored.

Major deficiency (5 points) if:
· Multiple instances of errors or omissions in the records or corrective action details.
· Numerous instances of checks not being carried out at the required frequencies.
· Numerous instances of incorrect parameters being monitored.
· No supporting documentation of the monitoring method and/or frequency being used.

Non-compliance (0 points) if:
· No records.
· Monitoring frequency is insufficient to verify the process is in control.

PGFS-R-063                                    Page 78 of 90  October 8, 2021
©2021 Primus Group, Inc. All rights reserved                 Rev. 1

· Monitoring parameters in use are insufficient to verify the process is in control.
· Failure to maintain records properly.
· Failure to record corrective action details.

3.10.4f: Are there records for periodic visual inspection of the water source with corrective actions
(where necessary)?
Total compliance (5 points): "Records" may include calendar books with commentary regarding what was
checked, the condition, unusual occurrences, (e.g. issues regarding well cap, well casing, seals, piping
tanks, treatment equipment, cross connections, trash, animal presence, pooled water, etc.), and any
action taken. The appropriate documentation should be available for review.

Minor deficiency (3 points) if:
· Single/isolated instance(s) of an error or omission in the records or corrective action details.

Major deficiency (1 point) if:
· Multiple instances of errors or omissions in the records or corrective action details.

Non-compliance (0 points) if:
· Failure to maintain records.
· Failure to record corrective action details.

3.10.05: Is reclaimed water used in the operation? NOTE: This refers to wastewater that has gone
through a treatment process.
What is this water source used for (e.g., irrigation, crop protection sprays, fertigation, frost/freeze
protection, cooling, dust abatement, etc.)?
What type of irrigation methods are used (e.g., micro-irrigation, drip, overhead, flood irrigation,
furrow irrigation, seepage irrigation, hydroponic (specify type))?
Does the water come into contact with the edible portion of the crop?
Total points 0: Information gathering question. Reclaimed water should be treated with adequate
disinfection systems and tested frequently, ideally under the direction of a water reclamation authority or
other management body. Reclaimed water should be subject to applicable local and national regulations
and standards including World Health Organisation (WHO) guidelines for the safe use of wastewater,
excreta and greywater in agriculture. Prior to using this water for agricultural purposes, growers should
check with regulatory bodies to determine the appropriate parameters and tolerances to be used.

3.10.05a: Are generic E. coli tests conducted on the water (taken from the closest practical point
of use) at the required and/or expected frequency? A ZERO POINT (NONCOMPLIANCE) DOWN
SCORE IN THIS QUESTION RESULTS IN AUTOMATIC FAILURE OF THIS AUDIT.
Total compliance (15 points): Microbial water testing, including generic E. coli, should occur for all water
sources used for any growing activities like crop protection/fertilizer and frost or freeze prevention
programs. Water samples should be taken from as close to the point of use as is practical. At least one
sample per distribution system is required. If there are multiple sampling points in a distribution system,
then samples are taken from a different location each test (randomize or rotate locations).
For farm and indoor agriculture operations, one sample per water source is collected and tested prior to
use if >60 days since the last test of the water source. Additional samples are taken at least monthly
during use of the water source. A less frequent testing is acceptable if supported by a valid documented
risk assessment although there should be at least one water test per season. Where there are more
stringent federal, national or local requirements, those requirements should be followed. If a risk
assessment is used to define the frequency, it should include at a minimum the water source, method of
application (edible product contact vs non- edible product contact), reference or evidence to the microbial
historical data of the water source, and its vulnerability to contamination. A vulnerable water source is one
for which there is a potential risk of contamination by fecal matter (e.g. animals grazing upstream of a
river abstraction point, overloading of a sewage treatment plant by storm water) or other potential risk
factors. As examples, vulnerable sources may be surface water (rivers, lakes, natural ponds), reservoirs
supplied by well water or rain water, groundwater collected from shallow wells. Other sources may be

PGFS-R-063                                    Page 79 of 90  October 8, 2021
©2021 Primus Group, Inc. All rights reserved                 Rev. 1

vulnerable under specific circumstances and the degree of vulnerability should be established by the
grower's risk assessment. In the event the risk assessment indicates contamination risks, the operation
should implement adequate measures to prevent and/or mitigate product contamination.

References:
https://extension.psu.edu/safe-uses-of-agricultural-water
https://gaps.cornell.edu/educational-materials/decision-trees/agricultural-water-production/

Minor deficiency (10 points) if:
· Single/isolated instance(s) of water testing not occurring at the right frequency.
· Sample was not taken from the closest practical point of use.

Major deficiency (5 points) if:
· Numerous instances of water testing not occurring at the right frequency.

Automatic Failure (0 points) if:
· No microbiological test results are available.
· A water test has not been performed within the past 12 months.

3.10.05b: Do written procedures (SOPs) exist covering proper sampling protocols which include
where samples should be taken and how samples should be identified?
Total compliance (10 points): There should be documented procedures in place detailing how water
samples are taken in the growing area, including stating how samples should be identified i.e. clearly
naming the location that the sample was taken, the water source and the date (this is important in order to
be able to calculate geometric means). Samples should be taken at a point as close to the point of use as
possible where water contacts the crop, so as to test both the water source and the water distribution
system.

Minor deficiency (7 points) if:
· Single/isolated instance(s) of errors or omissions in the SOP.

Major deficiency (3 points) if:
· Numerous instances of errors or omissions in the SOP.

Non-compliance (0 points) if:
· There are no sampling SOPs.

3.10.05c: Do written procedures (SOPs) exist covering corrective measures for unsuitable or
abnormal water testing results?
Total compliance (10 points): Written procedures (SOPs) should exist covering corrective measures not
only for the discovery of unsuitable or abnormal water test results but also as a preparation on how to
handle such findings.

Minor deficiency (7 points) if:
· Single/isolated instance(s) of errors or omissions in the SOP.

Major deficiency (3 points) if:
· Numerous instances of errors or omissions in the SOP.

Non-compliance (0 points) if:
· There are no SOPs covering corrective measures for unsuitable/abnormal water test results.
· The written SOPs were not followed when unsuitable or abnormal water testing results were recorded

     in the last 12 months.

PGFS-R-063                                    Page 80 of 90  October 8, 2021
©2021 Primus Group, Inc. All rights reserved                 Rev. 1

3.10.05d: If unsuitable or abnormal results have been detected, have documented corrective
measures been performed?
Total compliance (15 points): For generic E. coli (unless more stringent guidelines/laws in existence)
<126MPN (or CFU)/100mL (rolling geometric mean n=5) and <235MPN (or CFU)/100mL for any single
sample. Where thresholds have been exceeded, there should be recorded corrective actions that prevent
or mitigate product contamination, including investigations, water retests, and if required, crop testing (E.
coli O157:H7 and Salmonella - zero tolerance). Failure to take corrective actions, prevent or mitigate
product contamination when there is evidence of high levels or an upward trend of E. coli may result in an
automatic failure of the audit. For farms or indoor agriculture operations following the FDA's Produce
Safety Rule, the operation needs to ensure they are meeting the requirements for samples to calculate
the Geometric Mean (GM) and Statistical Threshold (STV).

Reference:
https://producesafetyalliance.cornell.edu/food-safety-modernization-act/produce-safety-rule/

Minor deficiency (10 points) if:
· Single/isolated instance(s) of water sources being used without corrective actions being performed

     upon receipt of unsuitable or abnormal water test results showing >235 MPN for any single sample or
     >126 MPN for a geometric mean.

Major deficiency (5 points) if:
· Numerous instances of water sources still being used without corrective actions being performed one

     week after receipt of unsuitable or abnormal water test results showing >235 MPN for any single
     sample or >126 MPN for a geometric mean.

Non-compliance (0 points) if:
· No corrective measures have been performed.
· Retests were performed greater than one month after receiving the unsuitable or abnormal water test

     results. Contaminated water is being consistently used for product contact use without
     evidence of corrective actions being implemented. (This qualifies as an automatic failure and
     should be scored under 3.05.10.)

3.10.05e: Where anti-microbial water treatments (e.g. chlorination, U.V., ozone, etc.) are used, are
there records of the monitoring frequencies, results and where necessary the corrective actions?
Total compliance (15 points): Where any water treatment is performed at the source (e.g., well, canal,
holding tank) this should be monitored. The strength of anti-microbial chemicals should be checked using
an appropriate method for the anti-microbial in use (e.g., chemical reaction-based test, test probe, or as
recommended by the disinfectant supplier). If using an anti-microbial treatment system (e.g. chlorination),
there should be monitoring logs completed on at least a daily basis when the system is being used. Any
well "shocking" should be recorded.

Minor deficiency (10 points) if:
· Single/isolated instance(s) of an error or omission in the records or corrective action details.
· Single/isolated instance(s) of checks not being carried out at the required frequencies.
· Single/isolate instance(s) of incorrect parameters being monitored.

Major deficiency (5 points) if:
· Multiple instances of errors or omissions in the records or corrective action details.
· Numerous instances of checks not being carried out at the required frequencies.
· Numerous instances of incorrect parameters being monitored.
· No supporting documentation of the monitoring method and/or frequency being used.

Non-compliance (0 points) if:
· No records.
· Monitoring frequency is insufficient to verify the process is in control.

PGFS-R-063                                    Page 81 of 90  October 8, 2021
©2021 Primus Group, Inc. All rights reserved                 Rev. 1

· Monitoring parameters in use are insufficient to verify the process is in control.
· Failure to maintain records properly.
· Failure to record corrective action details.

3.10.05f: Are there records for periodic visual inspection of the water source with corrective
actions (where necessary)?
Total compliance (5 points): "Records" may include calendar books with commentary regarding what was
checked, the condition, unusual occurrences, (e.g. issues regarding well cap, well casing, seals, piping
tanks, treatment equipment, cross connections, trash, animal presence, pooled water, etc.), and any
action taken. The appropriate documentation should be available for review.

Minor deficiency (3 points) if:
· Single/isolated instance(s) of an error or omission in the records or corrective action details.

Major deficiency (1 point) if:
· Multiple instances of errors or omissions in the records or corrective action details.

Non-compliance (0 points) if:
· Failure to maintain records.
· Failure to record corrective action details.

3.10.06: Is tail water (run-off water including hydroponics) used in the operation?
What is this water source used for (e.g., irrigation, crop protection sprays, fertigation, frost/freeze
protection, cooling, dust abatement, etc.)?
What type of irrigation methods are used (e.g., micro-irrigation, drip, overhead, flood irrigation,
furrow irrigation, seepage irrigation, hydroponic (specify type))?
Does the water come into contact with the edible portion of the crop?
Total points 0: Information gathering question. Tail water return systems, including hydroponics, catch
spilled or runoff water and pump the water back to the top of the field/growing area.

3.10.06a: Are generic E. coli tests conducted on the water (taken from the closest practical point
of use) at the required and/or expected frequency? A ZERO POINT (NONCOMPLIANCE) DOWN
SCORE IN THIS QUESTION RESULTS IN AUTOMATIC FAILURE OF THIS AUDIT.
Total compliance (15 points): Microbial water testing, including generic E. coli, should occur for all water
sources used for any growing activities like crop protection/fertilizer and frost or freeze prevention
programs. Water samples should be taken from as close to the point of use as is practical. At least one
sample per distribution system is required. If there are multiple sampling points in a distribution system,
then samples are taken from a different location each test (randomize or rotate locations).

For farm and indoor agriculture operations, one sample per water source is collected and tested prior to
use if >60 days since the last test of the water source. Additional samples are taken at least monthly
during use of the water source. A less frequent testing is acceptable if supported by a valid documented
risk assessment although there should be at least one water test per season. Where there are more
stringent federal, national or local requirements, those requirements should be followed. If a risk
assessment is used to define the frequency, it should include at a minimum the water source, method of
application (edible product contact vs non- edible product contact), reference or evidence to the microbial
historical data of the water source, and its vulnerability to contamination. A vulnerable water source is one
for which there is a potential risk of contamination by fecal matter (e.g. animals grazing upstream of a
river abstraction point, overloading of a sewage treatment plant by storm water) or other potential risk
factors. As examples, vulnerable sources may be surface water (rivers, lakes, natural ponds), reservoirs
supplied by well water or rain water, groundwater collected from shallow wells. Other sources may be
vulnerable under specific circumstances and the degree of vulnerability should be established by the
grower's risk assessment. In the event the risk assessment indicates contamination risks, the operation
should implement adequate measures to prevent and/or mitigate product contamination.

PGFS-R-063                                    Page 82 of 90  October 8, 2021
©2021 Primus Group, Inc. All rights reserved                 Rev. 1

References:
https://extension.psu.edu/safe-uses-of-agricultural-water
https://gaps.cornell.edu/educational-materials/decision-trees/agricultural-water-production/

Minor deficiency (10 points) if:
· Single/isolated instance(s) of water testing not occurring at the right frequency.
· Sample was not taken from the closest practical point of use.

Major deficiency (5 points) if:
· Numerous instances of water testing not occurring at the right frequency.

Automatic Failure (0 points) if:
· No microbiological test results are available.
· A water test has not been performed within the past 12 months.

3.10.06b: Do written procedures (SOPs) exist covering proper sampling protocols which include
where samples should be taken and how samples should be identified?
Total compliance (10 points): There should be documented procedures in place detailing how water
samples are taken in the growing area, including stating how samples should be identified i.e. clearly
naming the location that the sample was taken, the water source and the date (this is important in order to
be able to calculate geometric means). Samples should be taken at a point as close to the point of use as
possible where water contacts the crop, so as to test both the water source and the water distribution
system.

Minor deficiency (7 points) if:
· Single/isolated instance(s) of errors or omissions in the SOP.

Major deficiency (3 points) if:
· Numerous instances of errors or omissions in the SOP.

Non-compliance (0 points) if:
· There are no sampling SOPs.

3.10.06c: Do written procedures (SOPs) exist covering corrective measures for unsuitable or
abnormal water testing results?
Total compliance (10 points): Written procedures (SOPs) should exist covering corrective measures not
only for the discovery of unsuitable or abnormal water test results but also as a preparation on how to
handle such findings.

Minor deficiency (7 points) if:
· Single/isolated instance(s) of errors or omissions in the SOP.

Major deficiency (3 points) if:
· Numerous instances of errors or omissions in the SOP.

Non-compliance (0 points) if:
· There are no SOPs covering corrective measures for unsuitable/abnormal water test results.
· The written SOPs were not followed when unsuitable or abnormal water testing results were recorded

     in the last 12 months.

3.10.06d: If unsuitable or abnormal results have been detected, have documented corrective
measures been performed?
Total compliance (15 points): For generic E. coli (unless more stringent guidelines/laws in existence)
<126MPN (or CFU)/100mL (rolling geometric mean n=5) and <235MPN (or CFU)/100mL for any single
sample. Where thresholds have been exceeded, there should be recorded corrective actions that prevent

PGFS-R-063                                    Page 83 of 90  October 8, 2021
©2021 Primus Group, Inc. All rights reserved                 Rev. 1

or mitigate product contamination, including investigations, water retests, and if required, crop testing (E.
coli O157:H7 and Salmonella - zero tolerance). Failure to take corrective actions, prevent or mitigate
product contamination when there is evidence of high levels or an upward trend of E. coli may result in an
automatic failure of the audit. For farms or indoor agriculture operations following the FDA's Produce
Safety Rule, the operation needs to ensure they are meeting the requirements for samples to calculate
the Geometric Mean (GM) and Statistical Threshold (STV).

Reference:
https://producesafetyalliance.cornell.edu/food-safety-modernization-act/produce-safety-rule/

Minor deficiency (10 points) if:
· Single/isolated instance(s) of water sources being used without corrective actions being performed

     upon receipt of unsuitable or abnormal water test results showing >235 MPN for any single sample or
     >126 MPN for a geometric mean.

Major deficiency (5 points) if:
· Single/isolated instance(s) of water sources being used without corrective actions being performed

     one week after receipt of unsuitable or abnormal water test results showing >235 MPN for any single
     sample or >126 MPN for a geometric mean.

Non-compliance (0 points) if:
· No corrective measures have been performed.
· Retests were performed greater than one month after receiving the unsuitable or abnormal water test

     results.
· Contaminated water is being consistently used for product contact use without evidence of

     corrective actions being implemented. (This qualifies as an automatic failure and should be
     scored under 3.05.10.)

3.10.06e: Where anti-microbial water treatments (e.g. chlorination, U.V., ozone, etc.) are used, are
there records of the monitoring frequencies, results and where necessary the corrective actions?
Total compliance (15 points): Where any water treatment is performed at the source (e.g., well, canal,
holding tank) this should be monitored. The strength of anti-microbial chemicals should be checked using
an appropriate method for the anti-microbial in use (e.g., chemical reaction-based test, test probe, or as
recommended by the disinfectant supplier). If using an anti-microbial treatment system (e.g. chlorination),
there should be monitoring logs completed on at least a daily basis when the system is being used. Any
well "shocking" should be recorded.

Minor deficiency (10 points) if:
· Single/isolated instance(s) of an error or omission in the records or corrective action details.
· Single/isolated instance(s) of checks not being carried out at the required frequencies.
· Single/isolate instance(s) of incorrect parameters being monitored.

Major deficiency (5 points) if:
· Multiple instances of errors or omissions in the records or corrective action details.
· Numerous instances of checks not being carried out at the required frequencies.
· Numerous instances of incorrect parameters being monitored.
· No supporting documentation of the monitoring method and/or frequency being used.

Non-compliance (0 points) if:
· No records.
· Monitoring frequency is insufficient to verify the process is in control.
· Monitoring parameters in use are insufficient to verify the process is in control.
· Failure to maintain records properly.
· Failure to record corrective action details.

PGFS-R-063                                    Page 84 of 90  October 8, 2021
©2021 Primus Group, Inc. All rights reserved                 Rev. 1

3.10.06f: Are there records for periodic visual inspection of the water source with corrective
actions (where necessary)?
Total compliance (5 points): "Records" may include calendar books with commentary regarding what was
checked, the condition, unusual occurrences, (e.g. issues regarding well cap, well casing, seals, piping
tanks, treatment equipment, cross connections, trash, animal presence, pooled water, etc.), and any
action taken. The appropriate documentation should be available for review.

Minor deficiency (3 points) if:
· Single/isolated instance(s) of an error or omission in the records or corrective action details.

Major deficiency (1 point) if:
· Multiple instances of errors or omissions in the records or corrective action details.

Non-compliance (0 points) if:
· Failure to maintain records.
· Failure to record corrective action details.

3.10.07: Are there backflow prevention devices on all main lines, including where chemical,
fertilizer and pesticide applications are made?
Total compliance (10 points): Water systems should be fitted with backflow prevention devices to prevent
contamination of the water supply. Irrigation systems should utilize effective devices which can minimize
the potential risk of accidentally allowing any injected chemical/fertilizer to flow back into the irrigation
well, surface water source, or to discharge onto the land where not intended. Main water lines should be
fitted with back-flow protection for the incoming water (no matter what the source). Individual water lines
should be fitted with backflow protection where practical.

Minor deficiency (7 points) if:
· Single/isolated instance(s) of a minor water line that is not protected in some way e.g. hose pipe,

     lacking an air gap for a dump tank inlet.

Major deficiency (3 points) if:
· Numerous instances of minor water lines that are not protected in some way e.g. hose pipe, lacking

     an air gap for a dump tank inlet.

Non-compliance (0 points) if:
· There is no backflow protection on primary main water line(s).

3.10.08: If the operation stores water (tank, cistern, container), is the storage container well
maintained?
Total compliance (15 points): Container should be structurally sound with no evidence of damage or rust,
no vegetation growing on or in the container. The base of the container should be free from debris and
weeds. Access lids are properly secured, and any vents, overflow and drains are screened. Air gaps are
present and should be at least twice the diameter of the water supply inlet and not be less than 25 mm (1
inch).

Minor deficiency (10 points) if:
· Single/isolated instance(s) of debris, weeds or other potential contaminants.

Major deficiency (5 points) if:
· Multiple instances of debris, weeds or other potential contaminants.

Non-compliance (0 points) if:
· The storage container(s) are not well maintained.

Pesticide Usage

PGFS-R-063                                    Page 85 of 90  October 8, 2021
©2021 Primus Group, Inc. All rights reserved                 Rev. 1

3.11.01: Are there up-to-date records of all pesticides applied during the growth cycle (including
soil and substrate pre-plant treatments)? A ZERO POINT (NON-COMPLIANCE) DOWNSCORE IN
THIS QUESTION RESULTS IN AUTOMATIC FAILURE OF THIS AUDIT.
Total compliance (15 points): The growing operation should follow a pesticide application record keeping
program that at least includes the following: date and time of application, crop name, treated area size
and location (must be traceable), brand/product name, EPA registration information (or country of
production equivalent registration information), active ingredient, amount applied (rate/dosage), applicator
identification, pre-harvest interval, restricted entry interval, application equipment identification and target
pests. Records should include biopesticides (http://www2.epa.gov/pesticides/biopesticides). Information
may be recorded on separate documents providing all information is available and consistent.

Minor deficiency (10 points) if:
· Single/isolated instance(s) of missing required information (e.g. missing target pest, applicator

     identification, equipment identification, etc.)

Major deficiency (5 points) if:
· Numerous instances of missing required information (e.g. missing target pest, applicator

      identification, equipment identification, etc.)

Automatic Failure (0 points) if:
· Any failure to record critical required information (e.g. brand/product name, date, amount

      applied, location, etc.).
· Fundamental failure to record required information.

3.11.02: Are all pesticides applied during the growth cycle authorized/registered by the
authority/government of the country of production? ANY DOWN SCORE IN THIS QUESTION
RESULTS IN AN AUTOMATIC FAILURE OF THE AUDIT.
Total compliance (15 points): Application records show all pesticides applied during the growth cycle are officially
registered by the country of production for the target crop (e.g. EPA in the US, COFEPRIS in Mexico, SAG in Chile,
Pest Management Regulatory Agency (PMRA) in Canada). In countries where there is approval for its use, this is
acceptable when operated by the government and considers as a minimum the target crop, pesticide trade name and
active ingredient, formulation, dosage, pre-harvest intervals and target pest(s) or in cases where the government
authorizes an active ingredient but not a trade name, there must be evidence of compliance with the
MRLs of the destination countries for the applied "authorized" active ingredient (see 3.11.05)
When pesticide product registration/authorization information does not exist for the target crop in the
country of production or there are not enough products registered/authorized to control a pest or disease
(partial registration/authorization), extrapolation is possible if that practice is allowed by the country of
production (e.g. in Mexico "Anexo Técnico 1. Requisitos Generales para la Certificación y
Reconocimiento de Sistemas de Riesgos de Contaminación (SRRC) Buen Uso y Manejo de Plaguicidas
(BUMP) o Buenas Prácticas Agrícolas en la Actividad de Cosecha (BPCo) durante la producción primaria
de vegetales ­ Section 12.3 should be considered. ANY DOWN SCORE IN THIS QUESTION RESULTS
IN AN AUTOMATIC FAILURE OF THE AUDIT.
Minor deficiency (10 points) if:
· There is no minor deficiency category for this question

Major deficiency (5 points) if:
· There is no major deficiency category for this question.

Automatic Failure (0 points) if:
· There is a single incidence of pesticides being used without being registered or authorized by

     the country of production government.

3.11.03: Are all pesticides used during the growth cycle applied as recommended/directed in the
label? ANY DOWN SCORE IN THIS QUESTION RESULTS IN AN AUTOMATIC FAILURE OF THE
AUDIT.

PGFS-R-063                                    Page 86 of 90  October 8, 2021
©2021 Primus Group, Inc. All rights reserved                 Rev. 1

Total compliance (15 points): Application records should show that pesticides used during the growth
cycle are applied in accordance with label directions and any federal, state or local regulation(s).

In operations applying pesticides "authorized" by the government, where use directions are not in the
label, application records should show "authorization program" use/application directions are followed.

Minor deficiency (10 points) if:
· There is no minor deficiency category for this question

Major deficiency (5 points) if:
· There is no major deficiency category for this question.

Automatic Failure (0 points) if:
· There is a single incidence of pesticides being used without following label directions.

3.11.04: Where harvesting is restricted by pre-harvest intervals, are required pre-harvest intervals
on product labels, national (e.g., EPA) registration and any federal, state or local regulations and
guidelines being adhered to? ANY DOWN SCORE IN THIS QUESTION RESULTS IN AN
AUTOMATIC FAILURE OF THE AUDIT.
Total compliance (15 points): Pesticide application records and harvest records should show pre-harvest
intervals, as directed by the label, have been adhered to.

In operations applying pesticides "authorized" by the government, where use directions are not in the
label, application and harvest records show the "authorization program" directions for pre-harvest
intervals are followed.

Minor deficiency (10 points) if:
· There is no minor deficiency category for this question

Major deficiency (5 points) if:
· There is no major deficiency category for this question.

Automatic Failure (0 points) if:
· There is a single incidence of pre-harvest intervals not being adhered to.
· There is no evidence that pre-harvest intervals are being adhered to (e.g. missing or non-

     traceable to the location harvest records).

3.11.05: Where products are destined for export, is there information for pesticide Maximum
Residue Limits (MRLs) compliance considering country of destination, target crop(s), and active
ingredients applied?
Total compliance (15 points): Where products are destined for export, the operation should have
documented evidence about the MRL requirements for each country of destination for each pesticide
(active ingredient) applied during the growth cycle. This assumes that grower is meeting country of origin
MRL and label requirements. If there is no MRL defined by the country of destination for any active
ingredient applied, the operation should have documented evidence of the applicable regulations in that
country (e.g. default MRL, Codex Alimentarius, non-detectable, etc.). In the case where the MRLs have
been standardized or harmonized for a group of countries (i.e. European Union) it is acceptable that the
operation demonstrate compliance by referencing the "list" of MRLs issued from the formal body that
represents those countries for this purpose.

This question is Not Applicable if the product is only sold in the country of production (domestic
market).

Minor deficiency (10 points) if:

PGFS-R-063                                    Page 87 of 90  October 8, 2021
©2021 Primus Group, Inc. All rights reserved                 Rev. 1

· Single/isolated instance(s) of missing required information (e.g. missing MRL information for an active
     ingredient)

Major deficiency (5 points) if:
· Numerous instances of missing required information (e.g. missing MRL information for 3 or more

     active ingredients)

Non-conformance (0 points) if:
· There is no MRL information for the destination countries (or widespread missing information)

3.11.06: Where products are destined for export, is there evidence that Maximum Residue Limits
(MRLs) of the intended markets are met?
Total compliance (15 points): Maximum Residue Limits (MRLs) analysis should be performed when the
MRLs of the destination countries are lower (stricter) than the country of production. This assumes that
grower is meeting country of origin MRL and label requirements. MRL test results and records should
demonstrate that products/crops meet MRL regulations in those intended markets and any non-
conforming product is diverted from those markets.

The auditor should review MRL laboratory reports to ensure MRL entry requirements are met for the
country of destination or the applicable regulation in the country of destination when there is no MRL set
for any active ingredient, (e.g. the Codex Alimentarius Commission, default MRL, under the limit of
detection [LOD], etc.). MRL laboratory reports should be traceable to the operation and consider at least
the active ingredients applied during the growth cycle.
Other alternative or complementary methods to demonstrate MRL compliance for an active ingredient
include:

     i) Documented analysis of degradation curves and corresponding dosage and/or pre-harvest
interval modifications. Degradation curves used as reference should be issued/provided by the
manufacturer of the pesticide or country of production government and correspond to the degradation of
the pesticide active ingredient in the agroclimatic zone where the Plant Protection Product was applied.

     ii) Industry guidelines (e.g. "Agenda de Pesticidas" From ASOEX Chile).

Following a procedure for when and where to pull samples for MRL testing based on risk considering
factors such as active ingredients applied, timing of the application and harvest, pre-harvest intervals,
dosage, etc., is an ideal practice.

This question is Not Applicable if the product is only sold in the country of production (domestic
market).

Minor deficiency (10 points) if:
· There is no minor deficiency category for this question

Major deficiency (5 points) if:
· There is no major deficiency category for this question.

Non-compliance (0 points) if:
· There is a single incidence of an active ingredient with an exceeded MRL.
· There is no evidence of MRL compliance for any active ingredient applied.
· Evidence provided is not sufficient to support MRL compliance.
· Automatic failure if corrective actions are not provided and accepted by the certification body.

3.11.07: Is there a documented procedure for the pesticide applications, considering mixing and
loading, applying, and equipment cleaning?
Total compliance (15 points): There should be a documented procedure describing how to mix and load
pesticides, how to apply pesticides and how to rinse and clean pesticide application equipment. The
procedure should include adhering to the product label.

PGFS-R-063                                    Page 88 of 90  October 8, 2021
©2021 Primus Group, Inc. All rights reserved                 Rev. 1

Mixing and loading procedures should require activity to be in a well-ventilated, well-lit area away from
unprotected people, food and other items that might be contaminated.
Application procedures should include information about the necessary Personal Protective Equipment
(PPE), re-entry intervals, excessive winds, posting of treated areas, etc.
Equipment cleaning procedures should include measuring devices, mixing containers, application
equipment (e.g. sprayer), rinseable containers, etc., and should address: rinsing empty equipment
immediately to prevent residues from drying and becoming difficult to remove, and adding the rinsate
(water from rinsing containers or equipment) to spray tanks as part of the pesticide mixing process.

If any of these practices are observed during the inspection, it should be evident that the procedures are
being followed.

Minor deficiency (10 points) if:
· Single/isolated instance(s) of an error or omission in the procedure or practice.

Major deficiency (5 points) if:
· Numerous instances of an error or omission in the procedure or practice.

Non-conformance (0 points) if:
· Widespread errors or omissions in the procedure or practice.
· There is no procedure.

3.11.08: Is there documentation that shows the individual(s) making decisions for pesticide
applications is competent?
Total compliance (15 points): Current valid certificates, licenses, or another form of proof of training
recognized by prevailing national/local standards and guidelines should be available for the individual(s)
making decisions on pesticide applications (e.g., choice of pesticides, application timings, rates, etc.)

Minor deficiency (10 points) if:
· Single/isolated instance(s) of missing documentation.

Major deficiency (5 points) if:
· Single/isolated instance of a proof of training/certificate/license being out of date.
· Numerous instances of missing documentation.

Non-compliance (0 points) if:
· There is no documentation for the individual(s) making the decision(s).

3.11.09: Is there documentation that shows that individuals who handle pesticide materials are
trained and are under the supervision of a trained person?
Total compliance (15 points): All workers who handle pesticides must have current certificates, licenses,
or other forms of proof of training (recognized by prevailing national/local standards and guidelines)
qualifying them to do so independently or they must have proof of training (in-house or external) and be
under the supervision of a worker who can do so independently.

Minor deficiency (10 points) if:
· Single/isolated instance(s) of missing training documentation.

Major deficiency (5 points) if:
· Numerous instances of missing training documentation.
· Worker who is not qualified to handle pesticide materials independently has training but no

     supervision.

Non-compliance (0 points) if:
· There is no documentation showing training for individuals handling pesticide materials.

PGFS-R-063                                    Page 89 of 90  October 8, 2021
©2021 Primus Group, Inc. All rights reserved                                   Rev. 1
· There is no documentation for the supervising person.

Document Revision History

Date        Rev.#  Description
2/18/21        0   Initial
10/8/21        1   Changes to questions 3.02.03a, 3.02.04, 3.09.01 & 3.10.05.

PGFS-R-063                 Page 90 of 90                                       October 8, 2021
